CREDITS | 
Tote TEa ERT a - Er —l a ag 

WRITTEN & DESIGNED BY Shane Lacy Hensley, with Clint Black 
ART DIRECTION BY Aaron Acevedo & Alida Saxon 

LAYOUT BY Karl Keesler & Thomas Shook 
COVER ART BY Jimbo Salgado & Unique Soparie 
INTERIOR ART BY Aaron Acevedo, Bruno Baxila, Chris Bivins, Emil Cabaltierra, Donald 
Crank, Dennis Darmody, Sebastien Ecosse, Alberto Foche, Bien Flores, Gil Formosa, Ross 
Grams, Konrad Korgull, Irina Kuzmina, Chris Malidore, Jordan Peacock, Aaron Riley, Martin 
De Diego Sadaba, Alida Saxon, Unique Soparie, Bryan Syme, Jon Taylor, Tomek Tworek, 
Cheyenne Wright 
LINE EDITORS: Matthew Cutter, John Goff, Teller, Scott Woodard 

PINNACLE PLAYTESTERS & PROOFERS: Erica Balsley, Jodi Black, Matthew Cutter, Preston 
DuBose, John Goff, Norm Hensley, Simon Lucas, Mike McNeal, Thomas Shook, Steve Todd 

ADVOGATES, CONTRIBUTORS & PLAVTESTERS 
Dave Andrews, Veronica Blessing, Ron Blessing, Jayson C, Jack Emmert, Chris Fuchs, M. 
Alfonso Garcia, Marc Gacy, David Garrett, Hamish Halket, Darrell Hardy, Dustin Hatchett, 
Darrell Hayhurst, John Hopler, Neal Hyde, Aaron Isaac, Derek Johnson, R Kal Ringenbach, 
Steve Kellison, Christopher Landauer, Lee Langston, Adam Loyd, Min Lungelow, Brian 
McCabe, Randy Mosiondz, Andrea Parducci, Sean Patrick Fannon, Paul Rigby, Dave Ross, 
Matt Rowles, Tracy Sizemore, Zeke Sparkes, Robert Spice, Bill Stilson, Joe Thomas, Brett Wallis, 
Scott Woodard, Michael Ysker, Micheal Zeid 

SPECIAL THANKS T0 OUR LIGENSEES, THE AGES 
Please see our website at www.peginc.com for a current list. Thank you so much for sharing 
your incredible creativity and passion with our community. Truly. 

SPEGIAL THANKS TO OUR INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS 
Brazil: Guilherme Moraes, Fernando Pires, Eder Marques, Daniel Martins of Retropunk— 
France: Sabine Abbonato, Ghislain Bonnotte, David Burckle, Damien Coltice, Yannick 
“Torgan” Le Guédart of Black Book Editions — Germany: Markus Ploetz, Michael Mingers of 
Ulisses Spiele (Adventure Edition) — Germany (Deluxe Edition): Sascha Schnitzer, Christian 
Loewenthal of Prometheus Games — Italy: Luca Basile, Matteo Ceresa, Gionata Dal Farra of 
Jolly Troll — Poland: Piotr Korys, Umberto Pignatelli, Andy Slack, Tomasz Z. Majkowski of 
GRAmel Books — Russia: Anastasia “Chima” Gasteva, Aleksandr Ermakov, Pavel Gurov of 
Studio 101 — South Korea: Seungyeon Yi, Hanah Seo — Spain: Jorge “Tiberio” Coto, Adolfo 
Garcia, M. Alfonso Garcia of HT Publishers 

Dedicated to hundreds of thousands of Game Masters and players who have explored 
countless landscapes, rolled endless Aces, and shared their love and enthusiasm of 
gaming with friends, family, and strangers around the most Savage of Worlds... 

Savage Worlds, all unique characters, 
creatures, and locations, artwork, logos, 
and the Pinnacle logo are © 2019 Great 
White Games, LLC; DBA Pinnacle 

Entertainment Group. Distributed by 
ENTERTAINMENT; EREUERP Studio 2 Publishing, Inc. Printed in China. 

WWW.PEGINC.COM 



EE 

CONTENTS 
rfes T e 
ANY TIME, ANY PLAGE 5 GHAPTER FOUR: THE ADVENTURE TOOL KIT 111 

ANNES. I 111 
GETTING STARTED @ Chases& Vehicles... ....0.000.c.n..no 113 

Dramatic Tasks... 800 8. on 122 
De POOL. 0s oe rie ve nhs wins oleae + +n Gus 40 124 

GHAPTER ONE: CHARAGTERS 9 BEATS erro rr a Se 70 atu 125 
RACES. sale = nk sa Ea ments aioe 12° Interudes. ...... 00. Jue JERE oo a 130 
Making Ragesh.. .. . .... ...ooveseraroniovniss 18 MassBattles.......... “FLL... . oo ut 131 
Hindraneest. 0... Le i. ohane nity 22° Networking..... ho. Go Bert... cL 133 
LTE tote eth te dBe  o wx le hn vw ww in vg ww mcna 29 Quick Encounters... . coil. . oteeld 134 

# Edges... hi ssa a 37 SettingRules.............00 oi... 136 
Advancement... it. ei ee 54 Setting Rule Checklist .................... 142 
Character Creation Summary. .............. Be Social Conflict, scueisla.. mathe s 143 
Hindrance Summaries. ....ov..vue.s si .snes 56 IRTraVel S.J 0 ein train ir nae 144 
TraltSummaries’. .. =u cn neon die vis SSREWealthe.. are,ae, 145 
Ede Summaries... 5... 00. ell 59 

GHAPTER FIVE: POWERS 147 
GHAPTER TWO: GEAR 65 Arcane Backgrounds .. ..... oN0 147 
ATION s. ev se rele cies i aietely Sata ale xis BOE Trappings. SBS. siTen saEbine iNntr.Pure 149 
Personal Weapons’... .. 5. eesonesoanaines 720 Activation ...... icseaivey vee sine veins 150 
Modern Firearms. .....oo..... reser 74 BOWELS evr EE et 154 
Sr ET RS 77° POWer SUMNTATIES Jone Th vee veh vu Be Soe 172 
Vehicles ahd coe cL on a I Cv 81 

GHAPTER SIX: BESTIARY 175 
GHAPTER THREE: RULES ET Ev,r (Al 5) 
Combath ov. ot he le TE 91 
Healing i WI (EL Ri 96 GBHAPTER SEVEN: GAME MASTERING 103 
Situational Rules. .ocicii + cer sons sninnnivisons 97 Renning theGome oor reys or Morssrean) 198 

State SuMmMAries., ... «cv. civics eveivsireinnives 203 
D THIS Small Blast Templates. .vn. LAORL  204 

“td [’m THE eM a 2 Large Blast Template 2... ... 0h ewes 204 
1&5 MY BOOK, Par We” Medium Blast Template. .................. 205 
WELCOME Tt0  Bozo 3 Cone Template ston. . ci Gases inte ptiialin » 205 

“l Rup GAMES FOR-FMILY WHO ALljats Prats ‘RED’ AND NATE 
Wo ALWAYS PLAYS 4 BE.’ | Wrote SOME oF OU COMMENTS Ww 

THIS BOOK THAT MIGHT HELP You PLAY AND UN HOuT2- OLN GAME.” 

“TRERZE'S A PICTURE OF us ON 
THE LAST PAGE IF You WANT 

TO SEE WHO We ArzEl” 

—THe 6M 






Since it debuted in 2003, Savage Worlds Each new printing of Savage Worlds has 
has accommodated any setting you can added to the experience, carefully integrating 
imagi— fnroem gritty police procedurals new styles of play through the years with the 
and special ops thrillers to dungeon crawls, solid foundation laid at the very beginning. 
space opera, supers, and horror. Qur various This version of Savage Worlds is what we 
settings have explored supernatural terror hope is our best attempt yet at accommodating 
and the challenges of final exams in East not just every era, genre, and setting, but most 
Texas University™. We've wandered the every play style as well. 
moors of Europe and the savannas of Africa 

Want to sit around on couches and carry 
with Solomon Kane™. We've galloped across 

out most of the tale through talk and a few 
the haunted High Plains of Deadlands: The 

die rolls? It's here. 
Weird West™, and the irradiated wastes of 
Deadlands: Hell on Earth™. We've delved the Want to break out miniatures and have 

deepest dungeons, blasted to The Last Parsec™ a massive knock-down, drag-out fight? 
of known space and beyond, battled across Everything you need is here. 
the bloody fields of the Weird Wars™, and Need to tell an epic story that’s mostly 
slugged it out with super villains over cities roleplaying and narrative? Nothing's 
both real and imagined. stopping you — and sub-systems like Quick 
Like most gamers, we're fans of a lof of Encounters can help you sum up bloody 

books, movies, and game worlds. One week conflicts along the way if pressed for time. 
we might be inspired to run something like Perhaps the best thing a game system can 
Game of Thrones® and another we want to do is support your ideas. It should serve as 
share a cool idea inspired by the Avengers®. background and a common language for 
And while we love learning new game your players — then get out of the way as the 

systems and seeing what our friends and story races to its conclusion. We've attempted 

peers have created, we also like having a to make that even better in this edition by 
system we know like the back of our hands streamlining many modifiers, simplifying 
to fall back on, one that combines the crunch how you pose creative challenges for foes and 
of miniatures-oriented gameplay with support your allies, and even opening up new 
the ease of “theatre of the mind” and the options for heroic multi-actions. 
creative outlet of the most modern narrative- Enough talk. Grab your dice. It's time to 
based play. get savage! 



WHAT'S A ROLEPLAYING GAME? WHAT YOU NEED T0 PLAY 
A “roleplaying game” is one in which a Here's what else you need to begin your 
group of players take on the roles of various journey... 
characters and attempt to complete quests, 
tell a story, or overcome obstacles set before DIGE 
them by a “Game Master,” or “GM.” The Savage Worlds uses traditional gaming dice: 
GM might create all this straight from her 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 20-sided. You also need 
imagination, or she might use one of the a special “Wild Die,” a dé of a different 
published settings and adventures created color explained in Chapter Three. Dice are 
by Pinnacle, or by other creators who have available from your favorite local gaming 
licensed the rules for their own worlds. store, or online directly from Pinnacle. 

Most of the time, the players and GM We abbreviate the different dice as d4, dé, 
simply narrate their various actions in the d8, d10, d12, and d20. If you see something 
voices of their characters or those of the world like 2d6 + 1, that means to roll two six-sided 
around them. Sometimes they roll dice tied dice, add the two together, then add 1 to 
to their characters’ abilities to determine the the total. 
outcome. This book describes that process — 
how to create characters, battle monsters, THE AGTION DECK 
and complete quests through collective story Savage Worlds uses a standard deck of playing 
telling and interpretation of various die rolls. cards with the Jokers left in. Cards are used 

If you're new to this whole thing, we for initiative in combat and to help keep 
recommend watching some “actual play” things moving fast and furious. 
videos on the internet to get a feel for it. Look for official Savage Worlds Action 
And if you are new, we think you'll love Decks for both the core game and most of our 

exploring the incredible world of roleplaying Savage Settings! 
games! 

A SAVAGE SETTING 
Will you and your friends explore post- 
apocalypticruins? Lead a rugged warband in 
your favorite fantasy world? Take on the role 
of vampire lords? Or perhaps fight evilin the 
many theaters of the Weird Wars™? 



Pick up the book for your favorite game Most settings feature adventures (called 
setting at your local game store, or create Savage Tales) and Plot Point Campaigns. 2) 
your own. Im 

Official Savage Settings include i 

new Edges and Hindrances, Setting Rules, SAVAGE TALES = 
powers, weapons, gear, monsters, and more! Most Savage Tales are designed to be easy 2 

to read, prepare, and run in minutes, and 2) 
provide a solid night's entertainment. wn 

=bs Tokens of some sort represent “Bennies” Others are longer, full-length scenarios with  
(American slang for “benefits”). These can = 

multiple chapters designed to be run over 
be used to = 

reroll dice, prevent damage, and several sessions. Full-length adventures are [32] 
much more, all described on page 89. often bundled wit o 

h our Game Master Screens. 

MINIATURES [OPTIONAL PLOT POINT CAMPAIGNS 
If you like to use miniatures in your games, Most of our Savage Settings include a “Plot 
we make the most iconic characters and Point Campaign,” a grand backstory to the 
creatures for many of our settings, and our campaign world and a set of Savage Tales that 
friends at Reaper Minis and Bronze Age eventually resolve the main plot. 
make lots of other useful models for tactical 

T
ba h

t e
tl  

e G
s a
 on the tabletop. me Master can insert her own Savage 

Tales between the plot points, allowing the 
We also offer printable “Figure Flats” for players to choose where they wander between 

many of our games — print what you need those events that advance the larger story. 
for quick and colorful minis of heroes and 
heroines, villains, monsters, and more. GOMPANIONS 
SAVAGE SETTINGS Companions dig deeper into the most 

important genres — such as fantasy, science 
Our Savage Settings are designed to be easy fiction, super heroes, horror, and more. 
to read, run, and play. They focus on what 
players and Game Mast C

er o
s m
 a p
re a
 m n
o i
s o
t n
li s
k  
e a
ly d
 t d
o  
 new Edges and Hindrances, 

need in their adventur p
e o
s we
an r
d s
 ,
c  mo
a n
mp s
a t
i e
g r
ns s
. , a nd Setting Rules you can 

use to create your own world, or recreate 
your favorite book, movie, or even another 
tabletop or video game. 

The boxed set for Fritz Leiber’s Lankhmar: City of Thieves™ setting, including the books, Bennies, 
dice, Game Master's screen, and maps! We also offer miniatures by our friends at Bronze Age! Look 

for similar accessorifeosr all our Savage Settings. 






f 

CHAPTER ONE 

Great heroes are more than a collection 
of statistics and numbers, but in a game HINDRANGES 
system this is certainly where they begin. Hindrances are flaws, drawbacks, or dark 
To make your hero, download a Savage secrets drawn from a character's backstory. 
Worlds character sheet from our website at 

You can take up to 4 points of Hindrances. 
www.peginc.com and follow the steps below. 

A Major Hindrance is worth 2 points, and 
a Minor is worth 1. A hero could thus take 

GONGEPT two Major Hindrances, four Minor, or any 
Published Savage Settings often come with combination that adds up to 4 points. (You 
both character ideas and pregenerated can take more Hindrances if you want but the 
“Archetypes.” You can play these as-is or use maximum benefit is 4 points!) 
them to spark your own ideas. Taking Hindrances not only helps you 
You might play an iconic gunslinger in define and roleplay your hero, but also gives 

Deadlands: The Weird West, for example, or you additional points you can use to start 
you might try something a little different with additional attribute or skill points, Edges, 

and play the innocent schoolmarm destined or even money for gear. 
to save the town. Look through the player's For 2 points you can: 
section of your setting or talk to the GM if it’s * Raise an attribute one die type, or 
a world of her own creation to see what kind * Choose an Edge 
of character catches your interest. For 1 point you can: 

e Gain another skill point, or 
RAGE * Gain additional starting funds equal to 

twice your setting’s starting amount. 
Settings may feature everything from 
humans to strange aliens, graceful elves, or 
other exotic races. You can choose to play any TRAITS 
race available in your particular setting. Characters are defined by attributes and skills, 

A number of sample races are detailed on collectively called “Traits,” and both work in 
pages 12 through 17, as well as rules for exactly the same way. Attributes and skills 
players and Game Masters to create their own. are ranked by die types, typically from d4 

to d12, with d6 being the average for adult 
humans. Higher is better! 



ATTRIBUTES 
Every character starts with a d4 in each Skills are learned abilities such as firing 

[72] of five attributes: Agility, Smarts, Spirit, weapons, hand-to-hand combat, scientific 
Q 
red Strength, and Vigor (discussed in more detail knowledge, professional aptitudes, and so on. 
[+4 
oO on page 29). Skills in Savage Worlds are very broad to 

S You then have 5 points to increase your keep the action simple and straightforward. 
The Shooting skill, for example, covers all 

QLy 
attributes. Raising a d4 to a d6, for example, 

 costs 1 point. You're free to spend these points types of guns, bows, rocket launchers, and 

S other ranged weapons. 
= 

however you like, except that no attribute 
 may ever be raised above a d12 unless a racial Core Skills: Five skills are marked with a 

wn ability says otherwise (such as Attribute red star in the list that begins on page 29: 
Increase, page 18). If it does, each increase Athletics, Common Knowledge, Notice, 
beyond a d12 adds a +1 modifier. Increasing Persuasion, and Stealth. These are “innate” 
a d12 Strength two steps, for example, is a abilities most adult adventurers have. 
Strength score of d12 +2. Unless a racial ability (page 18), Edge, or 

Hindrance says otherwise, your character 
starts with a d4 in each of these five core skills. 

Buying Skills: After core skills are assigned, 
you have 12 additional points to raise core 
skills or buy and raise new skills as you see fit. 
Each die type costs 1 point (starting at d4) 

as long as the skill is equal to or less than the 
attribute it’s linked to (listed beside the skill 
in parentheses, in the list starting on page 
58). If you exceed the linked attribute, the 
cost becomes 2 points per die type. 
Skill Maximums: Skills may not be 

increased above d12 during character 
creation unless the character's race starts 
with the skill at dé. If the skill starts with a d6, 
increase her maximum to d12 +1. Celestials 
(page 21) start with a d6 in Faith, for 
example, which means their Faith skill may 
be increased tod12 + 1. 

DERIVED STATISTICS 
Your character sheet contains a few other 
statistics you need to fill in, described below. 

Pace is how fast your character moves in 
tactical situations like combat. Standard Pace 
is 6, which means six tabletop inches per 
game round. Each inch is two yards in the 
real world. Movement is explained in detail 
on page 92. 

curious... A TRAIT CHES ALSO Parry is equal to 2 plus half your character's 
CANTLY SEEMS TO THAT CONS Fighting die type (a total of 2 if a character 

cer HER W TROUBLE doesn’t have Fighting), plus any bonuses for 
shields or certain weapons. This is the Target 
Number (TN) to hit your hero in hand-to- 

iy” 
ll — hand combat. 

10 



For Fighting skills higher than d12, such as Unless your setting book or GM says 
d12 +1, add half the fixed modifier, rounded otherwise, the standard starting amount is 
down. For instance, Fighting d12+1 grantsa ~~ $500. A list of common gear and weapons can 
Parry of 8, while Fighting d12 +2 resultsina be found in Chapter Two. 
Parry of 9. Depending on the setting, this might be 
Size:A hero's default Sizeis0 unless altered everything the character owns or it may 

by racial abilities, Edges, or Hindrances. It represent their “adventuring” gear, with their 
cannot be less than —1 or more than +3. more mundane belongings stored ata home Mg} 
Toughness is your hero's damage thres- Or apartment. The latter is up to the Game 5 

hold. Damage rolls that equal or exceed Master. In modern settings, most everyone gg 
this number cause harm (explained later in should have a home, clothes, appliances, = 
Chapter Three). and so on. The equipment you list on your Q 
Toughness is 2 plus half your hero's Vigor character sheet should be your character's ™ 

plug Aor (ase the SRTGT Worn on Sis “adventuring gear” rather than an exhaustive 2 
. list of everything she owns. 

tor—sseoe page 69). Vigor over a d12 is 
calculated just like Parry, above. Players don’t have to worry about how 

much they can carry in most games, but if 
EDGES it becomes important, see Encumbrance on 

page 67. 
Attributes and skills are a character's 
basic statistics, but what really makes 
individuals different are their Edges. Even BACKGROUND DETAILS 
two legionaries in Weird Wars Rome Finish your new hero by filling in any 
with identical Traits play vastly additional history or background you 
different depending on the Edges care to. Ask yourself why she’s where 
they take. One might focus on she is and what her goals are. Where does 
Leadership Edges that lets him rally she live? Does she have any close friends 
his fellow soldiers while another or family who might be relevant 
concentrates on taking out large to the game? 
numbers of foes at once with Or just start playing and fill in 
Sweep or Frenzy. these details as they become 
Characters get Edges “important and you walk 

by taking Hindrances around in her shoes a bit. 
(see above), from racial You might also want to 
abilities (such as Humans’ talk to the other players. 
Adaptability, page 16), or Maybe your characters 
Advances once play begins know each other 
(page 54). ba i right from the start. 

A comprehensive list of Or you might col- 
Edges starts on page 37. lectively decide to optimize 
Your setting book likely has your group a bit and ensure 
additional abilities specific you've got a good assort- 
to that world or genre as well. \ ment of skills and abilities. 

If so, make sure you're play- 

GEAR ing what you want to play. 
There's no point in being the 

Some settings provide your party's healer if that's not a role 
hero with all the gear she needs. | you're interested in. 
Most simply grant a starting amount 
of funds you can use to purchase 
whatever you like from a relevant 
list of weapons, armor, and 
adventuring gear. 



® CONSTRUCT: Androids add +2 to recover 
from being Shaken, don’t breathe, ignore 
one level of Wound modifiers, and are 
immune to poison and disease. Constructs 

Not every hero is human. Below are sample cannot heal naturally. Healing one requires 
races common to many science fiction and the Repair skill, which takes one hour per 
fantasy settings. Use them as they are or current Wound level per attempt and is 
modify them to fit your particular world. not limited to the “Golden Hour” (see 
After these examples are guidelines for page 96). 
creating your own races as well. 

® QUTSIDER (Major): Androids subtract 2 
Note that the races allude to a lot of rules 

from Persuasion rolls when interacting 
we haven't explained yet. Just skim them for 

with anyone besides other androids, and 
now and come back once you've got a grasp 

have no legal rights in most areas (they're 
on the rest of the game. 

generally considered property). 

ANDROID = VOW (Major): Constructs are designed 
with a particular purpose. Player character 

Androids are semi-organic beings created constructs have broad directives such 
by advanced technology. The example as serving a particular corporation or 
here mimics humans in most ways and political faction. This acts as a Major Vow 
can generally pass for them when desired to that particular directive. If this ever 
(and not examined by a physician). Their causes a conflict of interest, the player and 
advanced neural network gives them artificial GM must figure out what the constructs 
intelligence complete with individual programming requires. 
personalities, quirks, and emotions just like 
any other sapient being. 
The android version presented here is a 

generic model. To create more specialized 
androids, use the custom racial abilities 
starting on page 18. 

= PACIFIST (Major): Unless the 
android is designed for 
combat, most advanced Jere AS NEEDED Fore 
societies require the OLDIETZS 
installation of “Asimov ANDRO S Ae E125 
Circuits,” a concept based MINETZS, ENTERTAN) 
on science fiction writer Isaac oz WHATEVETZ- 
Asimov's “First Law of Robotics.” 
The artificial being may not injure 
a sapient being, or through action 
or inaction, allow such a being to 
be harmed. This gives them the 
Pacifist (Major) Hindrance. 

12 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



From the crushing ocean depths 
come aquatic folk. They are thick 
and sturdy beneath the waves but 
often vulnerable in the dry air or 
searing heat of the surface. 

= AQUATIC: Aquarians cannot drown 
in water and move at their full Pace 
when swimming. See Movement on page 
92 for normal swimming rates. 

= DEPENDENCY: Aquarians must immerse them- 
selves in water one hour out of every 24 or become 
automatically Fatigued each day until they are 
Incapacitated. The day after Incapacitation from 
dehydration, they perish. Each hour spent in water 
restores one level of Fatigue. \ 

= LOW LIGHT VISION: Aquarians are used to the darkness 
of the depths. They ignore penalties for Dim and Dark 
Illumination. 

= TOUGHNESS: Life in the depths of their watery worlds has 
made aquarian flesh tough and resilient. Add +1 to 
their Toughness. 

Avions are humanoids 
with wings. They tend to 

be very slight of build owing 
to their hollow bones. Some are 

feathered while others are leathery 
or even scaled. 

® CAN'T SWIM: Avions’ wings are 
a hazard in water. They subtract 2 from 

Athletics (swimming) rolls and each inch moved in 
water costs them 3" of Pace. 

= FLIGHT: Avions fly at Pace 12 per round. Use Athletics 
when maneuvering. 

® FRAIL: Avions have —1 Toughness due to their hollow 
bones. 

= KEEN SENSES: Avions are more perceptive than most. 
They begin with a d6 in Notice (instead of d4) and may 
raise the skill to d12 +1. 

= REDUCED PACE: Dependence on flight and bulky 
wings make avions slightly slower when walking. 
Decrease their walking Pace by 1 and their running die 
by one step. 

SHILOVHVHD 



OWARVES 
Dwarves are short but stout, hardy people 
who come from massive caverns or high 
mountains. They are a proud, warlike race, 
usually made so by frequent contact with 
hostile races such as orcs and goblins. 
Dwarves usually live upwards of 200 years. 

In most fantasy campaigns, they have ruddy 
skin and all human hair colors. 

® LOW LIGHT VISION: Dwarven eyes are 
accustomed to the dark of the underearth. 
They ignore penalties for Dim and Dark 
IMlumination. 

= REDUCED PACE: Dwarves have short legs 
compared to most races. Decrease their 
Pace by 1 and their running die one die 
type. 

= TOUGH: Dwarves are stout and tough. 
They start with a d6 Vigor instead of a d4. 
This increases maximum Vigor to d12 +1. 

EIVES 
Elves are tall, thin souls with pointed ears and deep-set eyes of various colors. Whether they 
hail from the deep forests or hidden valleys, they are all born more graceful than humans, 

though somewhat slighter. Most elves live upwards of 300 
years. They have fair skin and their hair includes all 

human colors, plus shades of silver, blue, and gold. 

® AGILE: Elves are graceful and agile. They 
start with a d6 in Agility instead of a d4. 
This increases maximum Agility to 
di2+1. 

= ALL THUMBS: Elves have an 
inherent dislike of mechanical 
objects, and thus have the All 

Thumbs Hindrance. They shun most 
mechanical items and designs. 

= LOW LIGHT VISION: Elven eyes 
amplify light. Other races often 

claim they can see stars in the 
elves’ eyes. They ignore 
penalties for Dim and 
Dark Illumination. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



HALE-FIVES 
Half-elves gain the elves” grace but none of their elegant frailty. 
Most are well-adjusted, but some are shunned by one side 
of the family or the other and grow resentful. Others may 
even be mistreated. Their lifespans are closer to their 
human parent than those of their elven kin, living 
only to about 100 years. 

= HERITAGE: Half-elves may retain 
the grace of their elven parent or the 
adaptability of their human ancestry. 
A half-elf may either start with a 
free Novice Edge of his choice 
or a d6 in Agility instead of a d4 
(which also increases his Agility 
maximum to d12 +1). 

= LOW LIGHT VISION: Half-elves 
ignore penalties for Dim and 
Dark Illumination. 

= OUTSIDER (Minor): Half-elves 
are never quite comfortable in human 
or elven society, having a foot in both 
worlds but never fully standing in either. 
They subtract 2 from Persuasion rolls with all but 
others of their kind. 

HALE-FOLK 
Half-folk are small, nimble people with fuzzy 
brown or black hair. Though they are 
frail compared to most other races, their 
cheerful optimism (or wily cunning) gives 
them a “never say die” attitude that makes 
them more than a match for creatures 
twice their size. Half-folk see no reason 
to invite trouble and tend to live in their 
own close-knit communities far off the 
beaten path. 

® LUCK: Half-folk draw one additional 
Benny per game session. 

® REDUCED PACE: Decrease the character's 
Pace by 1 and their running die one die type. 

® SIZE -1: Half-folk average only about four feet tall, 
reducing their Size (and therefore Toughness) by 1. 

= SPIRITED: Half-folk are generally optimisticbeings. They 
start with a d6 Spirit instead of a d4. This increases their 
maximum Spirit to d12 +1. 

SHILOVHVYHD 



HUMANS 
[72] Humans in most settings get one free Edge 
a 
| of their choice. This option reflects their 
[4 versatility and adaptability compared to most 
(=) 
S other races. 

[#4] For more variety, the GM might give 

& humans abilities based on culture rather 
than race. For instance, a nomadic, horse- 

= based society might start with skill points in 
wn Riding and Survival. Cultural templates are 

designed just like making new races, though 
GMs should allow for more exceptions than 
usual since the abilities tend to be learned 
rather than truly innate. 

® ADAPTABLE: Humans begin play with any 
Novice Edge of their choosing. They must 
meet its Requirements as usual. 

RAKASHANS 
Rakashans are humanoid felines. Some have the bright colors of tigers, the speckled hides of 
leopards, or the exotic look of Siamese cats. All have sharp claws and teeth, and a cruel nature 
when it comes to dealing with their prey. 
Rakashans can be found in their own remote and exotic cities or as fringe elements of normal 

society. They are often too clever and beautiful to be shunned, but too cunning to gain others’ 
complete trust. 

® AGILE: Feline grace gives rakashans a d6 Agility attribute instead of a d4. This increases 
maximum Agility to d12+1. 

= BITE/CLAWS: Rakashan fangs and claws are Natural Weapons (page 
104) that cause Strength+d4 damage. 

® BLOODTHIRSTY: Rakashans can be cruel to their foes, often 
toying with them for simple amusement. They rarely take 
prisoners and feel little compunction about punishing 
captured foes. 

u CAN'T SWIM: Rakashans actually can swim, they just 
shun it and are not particularly good at it. They subtract 2 
from Athletics (swimming) rolls and each tabletop inch of 
movement in water uses 3" of Pace. 

® LOW LIGHT VISION: Rakashan eyes amplify light. They 
ignore penalties for Dim and Dark Illumination. 

= RACIAL ENEMY: Rakashan society rose at the expense of 
another. Pick a common race in your setting. Members 
of each culture subtract 2 from Persuasion when 
dealing with each other and often attack on 
sight. 



SAURIANS 
Lizard men typically come from steaming jungles or deep 
deserts where they have unique civilizations unknown 
to other sentient races. 

® ARMOR +2: Saurians have scaly skin 
that acts as leather armor. 

0 
® BITE:A saurian’s fangs are Natural Weapons a 
(page 104) that cause Strength+d4 damage. = 

= ENVIRONMENTAL WEAKNESS: Though not truly 5 
9] 

cold-blooded, saurians are poorly suited for frigid ~ 
conditions. They suffer a 4 penalty to resist cold m 

=x 
environmental effects, and suffer +4 damage [7] 
from cold-based attacks. 

= KEEN SENSES: Saurians have acute senses, 
giving them the Alertness Edge. 

= OUTSIDER (Minor): Most races distrust saurians 
for some reason. Perhaps it is their strange 
ways and customs, their often-sibilant speech, 
or an ancient subconscious fear of their reptilian 
ancestors. Saurians subtract2 from Persuasion rolls with all but others of their kind. 

BREAKING THE MOLD 
The racial archetypes presented here are iconic of their usual appearance in fantasy and 
science fiction, but players and Game Masters should feel free to break the tropes if they 
fit your particular setting. 
Maybe rakashans in your world have wings. Or aquarians are primitive, eight-armed 

cannibals who hunt more developed races on a post-apocalyptic water world. 
You can also make different versions of the same races. Perhaps the rakashans of one 
area evolved to resist cold (they're more like snow leopards), while another sprang from 
cheetahs (and have Fleet-Footed as a racial ability). The limit lies only in your imagination 
and desire to create something new and unusual! 

re 

ul KNOW A MAD SCIENTIST 
WHo’s A BEARD on AN

iy 

PACIFIST CATEZL VEGETARIAN. 
i EIA 2 

Te COVER, FIZIENT, OTZA 
LEOPA MAN 7 



(72) 
a a 
i 
[+4 Game Masters and players who want to sie their own races (or cultural archetypes) can use 
oO the system below. Our races are designed with the following rules: 
S ® Races and cultures begin with 2 points of Positive Racial Abilities. Additional positive 
[3] abilities must be countered with an equal value of negative ones. A +2 ability, for example, 
oS may be countered by a single -2 ability or two —1 abilities. 
S=  * If you want to include an ability we haven't included here, simply assign it a value based 

[7p] on the examples below. 
Names: Don’t be afraid to rename abilities to give your setting more flavor. If you want your 

horse nomads to have Riding skill at d6, for example, you might call it Born in the Saddle. It's 
all about creating rich flavor rather than lists of abilities your players have to keep up with. 

POSITIVE RACIAL ABILITIES 
The number in parentheses after the name of each entry is the number of times the particular enhancement 
may be taken. "U" means unlimited. 

VALUE ABILITY 

2 Adaptable (1): The race has great variation among its people and cultures. Characters start 
with a free Novice Edge of their choice (and must meet all the Edge’s Requirements). 

Additional Action (1): The being has additional appendages, enhanced reflexes, or exceptional 
eye-hand coordination. He may ignore 2 points of Multi-Action penalties each turn. 

Aquatic/Semi-Aquatic (1): For one point the character is semi-aquaticand can hold his breath 
1/2 for 15 minutes before checking fordrowning. For two, he’snative to the water. He cannot drown 

in oxygenated liquid and moves his full Pace when swimming (see Movement, page 92). 

1 Armor (3): The species has a thick hide or is encrusted in solid material like scaly plating or 
even rock. This grants Armor +2 each time it’s taken. 

Attribute Increase (U): During character creation, the species increases a particular attribute 
2 (Agility, Smarts, Spirit, Strength, or Vigor) one die type. This increases the Trait’s maximum 

by one as well. 

Bite (1): The race has fangs that cause Strength+d4 damage. See Natural Weapons, page 
104 for more information. 

Burrowing (1): The species can burrow into loose earth and move through it at half normal 
Pace (he cannot run). He cannot normally be attacked while burrowing, and can attempt to 

1 surprise opponents who didn’t see him coming by making an opposed Stealth vs. Notice 
roll. If successful, the burrower adds +2 to his attack and damage rolls that round, or +4 with 
araise (he has The Drop, page 100). 

Claws (1): The race has claws that cause Str+d4 damage. One more point may be spent to 
2/3/4 increase their damage to Strength +d6, and/or another to add AP 2. See Natural Weapons, 

page 104 for more information. 

Construct (1): Constructs are artificial beings made of inorganic material. They add +2 to 
recover from being Shaken, ignore one level of Wound modifiers, don’t breathe, and are 

8 immune to disease and poison. Wounds must be mended via the Repair skill. Each attempt 
takes one hour per current Wound level and ignores the “Golden Hour”. Many Constructs 
have the Dependency Negative Racial Ability (reflecting their need for a power source). 

Doesn't Breathe (1): The species does not breathe. Individuals aren’t affected by inhaled 
toxins, can’t drown, and don’t suffocate in a vacuum. (They may still freeze, however.) 

Edge (U): All members of this race have the same innate Edge chosen from those available 
2+X inthe setting. Unlike Adaptable, this ability ignores Requirements except other Edges. Each 

Rank beyond Novice costs an additional point to a maximum of Heroic Rank (5). 

Environmental Resistance (U): The species receives a +4 bonus to resist a single negative 
1 environmental effect, such as heat, cold, lack of air, radiation, etc. Damage from that source 

is also reduced by 4. 

18 

dp, 

Ww 

a=] 

as] 



Flight (1): The species can fly at Pace 6 (or 12 for 4 points) and “run” for extra movement 
as usual. For 6 points, the being can fly at Pace 24 and may “run” for 2d6" of additional 

2/4/6 movement. Maneuvering uses the Athletics skill. Racial flight presumes some kind of wings 
which can be targeted or fouled (a Bound or Entangled character cannot fly). 

Hardy (1): A second Shaken result in combat does not cause a Wound. 

Horns (1): The being has a horn or horns that cause Str+d4 damage (or Str+d6 for 2 points). 
1/2 

See Natural Weapons, page 104, for more information. 
Immune to Poison or Disease (2): The species isimmune to poison or disease (your choice). 
It may be taken twice for both effects. 

Infravision (1): The creature “sees” heat, either through eyes or other sensory organs. This 
halves Illumination penalties when attacking warm targets (including invisible beings). 

Leaper (1): The character can jump twice as far as listed under Movement, page 92. In 
addition, he adds +4 to damage when leaping as part of a Wild Attack instead of the usual 
+2 (unless in a closed or confined space where he cannot leap horizontally or vertically — 
GM's call). 

Low Light Vision (1): The being ignores penalties for Dim or Dark illumination (but not 
Pitch Darkness). 

No Vital Organs (1): These species have hidden, extremely tough, or redundant vital 
organs. Called Shots do no extra damage against them. 

Pace (2): The character's Pace is increased by +2 and his running die is increased a die type. 

Parry (3): The creatures natural Parry is increased by +1. This may be due to a prehensile 
tail, extra limbs, enhanced reflexes, or even latent psi-sense. 

Poisonous Touch (1): With a successful Touch Attack (page 108), bite, or claw, the victim 
must roll Vigor or suffer the effects of Mild Poison. For 3 points the poison can be upgraded 

1/3 to Knockout, Lethal, or Paralyzing instead, but each use causes the hero Fatigue. The 
character may always choose whether or not to use her poison touch. See page 128 for 
Poison and its effects. 

Power (U): The race has an innate ability that functions like a power (see page 147). For 2 
points, she has Arcane Background (Gifted) and a power that reflects her unusual ability. 

2/1 
Each time this is taken after the first costs 1 point and grants another power. It does not 
increase her Power Points — use the Power Points Edge for that. 

Reach (3): Long limbs, tentacles, etc. grant the creature Reach +1 (add +1 each time it's taken 
after the first). 

Regeneration (1): The being heals damage quickly. She may make a natural healing 
roll once per day (rather than every five days). For 3 points, permanent injuries may be 

2/3 recovered once all other Wounds are regenerated. Treat each injury as an additional Wound 
for purposes of recovery (the being may try once per week). 

Size +1 (3): The creature is larger than normal. Each point of Size adds directly to Toughness 
and increases maximum Strength one step. Large species may have difficulty using 
equipment designed for more traditional humanoids. See page 106 for more on Size. 
Skill (1/skill): The character starts with a d4 in a skill inherent to her race. For 2 points (or 1 

1/2 
if already a core skill), it starts at d6 and the skill’s maximum increases to d12+1. 

Skill Bonus (1/skill): For 2 points, the character has a +2 bonus when using a particular skill 
(this may only be taken once per skill). 

Sleep Reduction (2): The being needs half the normal amount of sleep as humans. If taken 
a second time, the being never sleeps. 

Super Powers (1): The race has truly extraordinary abilities taken from the Savage Worlds 
Super Powers Companion. The cost is 2 — for Arcane Background (Super Powers) — plus the 

2+X 
actual cost of the power selected (X). Make sure you have the GM's permission before taking 
this powerful ability. 
Toughness (3): The character has hardened skin, scales, or extremely dense tissue that 
increases his base Toughness by +1. 

Wall Walker (1): The species may walk on vertical surfaces normally, or inverted surfaces 
at half Pace. 

SHILOVHVHD 



NEGATIVE RACIAL ABILITIES 
VALUE ABILITY 

(72) 
a 2/3 Attribute Penalty (Once per Attribute): One attribute (but not its linked skills) suffers a 1 
- penalty. For 3 points, it suffers a -2 penalty. 
[+4 
oO Big (1): The race is particularly large in a world where most others aren't. He subtracts 2 from 

S -2 Trait rolls when using equipment that wasn’t specifically designed for his race and cannot 
wear their armor or clothing. Equipment, food, and clothing cost double the listed price. 

[44] 

oS Cannot Speak (1): The race has no vocal cords or cannot form the sounds made by most 

S other races. He can communicate with members of his own race naturally (through 
=  71 song, pheromones, body language, etc.). Other races can’t speak his “language” but may 
wn learn to understand him if they take the proper Language skill. The species can hear and 

understand other typical languages and may communicate via electronic devices or the like. 

Dependency (1): The race must consume orhave contact with some sort of relatively common 
substance for an hour out of every 24. Creatures from water-based worlds, for example, might 

2 need to immerse themselves in water; plant people might need sunlight. Without the required 
contact, a character becomes Fatigued each day until Incapacitated. A day after that, they 
perish. Each hour spent recovering with the appropriate substance restores a level of Fatigue. 

Environmental Weakness (U): The race suffers a —-4 penalty to resist a particular 
=] environmental effect, such as heat, cold, etc. If the being suffers an attack based on that 

form, the penalty acts as a bonus to damage. 

Fl Frail (2): The creature is less durable than most. Reduce its Toughness by 1. 

-1/=2 Hindrance (U): The race has an inherent Minor Hindrance for 1 point, or a Major Hindrance 
for 2. This doesn’t affect the ability to choose other Hindrances during character creation. 

71 Poor Parry (3): These beings are poor melee defenders; 1 Parry. 

Racial Enemy (U): This species dislikes another species relatively common to the setting. 
=1 They suffer a -2 penalty to Persuasion rolls when dealing with their rivals and may become 

hostile with little provocation. This may only be taken once per race. 

-1 Reduced Core Skills (5): This race starts with one less core skill. The skill may be gained 
normally but does not start at a d4. This may be taken once per core skill affected. 

Reduced Pace (1): For -1 point, reduce Pace by 1 and the running die a die type (d4is reduced 
-1/-2 to d4-1). For -2 points, reduce Pace another 2 points and subtract 2 from Athletics and rolls 

to resist Athletics where movement and mobility are integral to the challenge (GM's call). 

Size —1 (1): The entity is smaller than average, reducing its Size and Toughness by 1 (see the 
Size Table, page 179). 

Skill Penalty (Once per Skill): The race suffers a —1 penalty to a very commonly used 
“1/2 skill such as Fighting, Persuasion, or even Piloting in a game focused on airplanes (the GM 

decides based on her campaign). If the skill is less common or only comes up in certain 
situations, the penalty is —2. For 2 points, the penalty is -2/-4 instead. 

BELESTIALS & GUARDIANS 
ily i i es 7 ign — heir champions battle demonic 

Emil  is creating an “End of Days” campaign angels and t : : 

i 4d jo) a at planet Earth. She decides all player char
acters are either celestials (angels) 

or guardians (humans), and will have +4 points of rac
ial abilities instead of the usual +2. 

i omake her angels fairly iconic. They're tough, have wings, and call forth miracles. 

Tlatd6 (2 CA Flight (4), and Arcane Background (
Miracles) 2 points for 

the Edge). That's 8 points and she needs to get down to +4, s
o she needs 4 points of rapes racia 

abilities. Celestials are responsible for the meek 
and must fight the legions of Hell, sos Ns 

them a Vow (Major — Protect humanity) for 2 points a
nd Racial Enemy (Demons & Dey 9 or 

1 point. She finishes with All Thumbs for —1, Emily 
figures angels don’ t really get technology. 

Emily’s guardians are human champions who fight th
e “Infernals.” These i i 

she starts with Adaptable (2 points). They're also harden
ed survivors of the End fie. so they 

also get Attribute Increase (Vigor) for another two points. E
mily then gives them the : a 

Edge (2 points) since they serve the celestials, an
d the same Vow (Major — Protect humanity 

for 2 points to balance everything back to +4. 



Angels are a great and varied lot, but all have these traits in common. 
® ALL THUMBS: Celestials are not accustomed to technology or machines. 
= ARCANE BACKGROUND (Miracles): Celestials can call forth a variety of blessed miracles. 

® FAITH: All celestials start with a dé in Faith. This increases their maximum to d12 +1. 

® FLIGHT: Angels fly at Pace 12. 
= RACIAL ENEMY (Demons & Devils): Those who descend from above do not easily tolerate 
those who crawl forth from the Abyss. 

= VOW (Major—  Protect humanity): The blessed must protect the flock that remains on the 
ravaged Earth. > 

Those humans who serve the Heavenly Choir are called guardians. 
= ADAPTABLE: Guardians begin play with any Novice Edge of their choosing (meeting its 
Requirements as usual). 

® CHAMPIONS: Guardians have the Champion Edge, giving 
them a +2 bonus to damage against supernaturally 
evil foes such as demons and 
devils. 

® VIGOROUS: Those humans 
who have inherited this 
blasted Earth start the game 
with a dé Vigor instead of 
a d4. This increases their 
Vigor maximum tod12 +1. 

=a VOW (Major— Protect 
humanity): The blessed 
must protect the remain- 
ing flock on Earth. 

det; Bur| $0 WANNA PLAY THIS!
 

—~ReD 

SHILOVHVYHD 



ALL THUMBS [MINOR] 
Due to upbringing, lack of exposure, or 
pure bad luck, some individuals are “all 
thumbs” when it comes to mechanical or 

indrances are character flaws and physical 
technological devices. 

handicaps that occasionally make life a little 
tougher for your hero. All Thumbs inflicts a —2 penalty when using 

mechanical or electrical devices. If he rolls a 
Some Hindrances have actual game 

Critical Failure while using such a device 
effects. Other, more subjective “roleplaying” 

(and it doesn’t already have a built-in effect), 
Hindrances help you understand and roleplay 

it's broken. If the GM feels it's appropriate, it 
your character. They should occasionally 

can be fixed with a Repair roll and 1d6 hours. 
cause her to actin ways that aren't necessarily 
smart, efficient, or in the best interests of 
the party or the overall goal. That's what 

Anemic characters are particularly susceptible 
roleplaying games are all about, and the GM 

to sickness, disease, environmental effects, 
should reward you with Bennies when your 

and fatigue. They subtract 2 from Vigor rolls 
Hindrances cause significant trouble. 

made to resist Fatigue (see Hazards, starting 
on page 125). 

ARROGANT (MAJOR) 
Your hero doesn’t think he’s the best — he 
knows he is. Whether it’s swordsmanship, 
kung fu, or painting, few compare to his skills 
and he flaunts it every chance he gets. 
Winning isn’t enough for this champion. 

He wants to dominate his opponent and 
prove there's no one better. He's the kind of 
fighter who disarms an opponent in a duel 
just to pick the sword up and hand it back 
with a smirk. Arrogant individuals look for 
the greatest threat in battle, hacking their way 
through lesser minions only because theyre 
in the way. 

BAD EVES [MINOR OR MAJOR) 
Your hero's eyes aren’t what they used to 
be. He suffers a —1 penalty to any Trait roll 
dependent on vision (such as ranged attacks 
and Notice rolls) or -2 as a Major Hindrance. 

In settings where glasses are available, 
they negate the penalty when worn. If lost 

NATE ALWAYS PLAYS “GABE,” or broken during a combat (generally a 
A NO-NONSENSE TouGH Gud 50% chance when he’s Wounded, falls, or 

WiTH A GRRUFF EXTERIOBURT suffers some other trauma), the character 
A HEAROTF  PUi2€ GOLD. is Distracted (and Vulnerable if a Major 

Hindrance) until the end of their next turn. 
IN ADVANCED SETTINGS HE'S 

TECHS AWM. [N FANTASY GAMES BAD LUGK [MAJOR] 
HE'S USUALLYA KNIGHT O12 Your hero is a little less lucky than most. He 

WAR I2I0T2-OF SOME SOT. gets one less Benny per game session than 
normal. A character cannot have both Bad 
Luck and the Luck Edge. 

- gy SD —— a -—J 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



He suffers a -2 penalty to Common Know- 
Loose lips sink ships, the saying goes. This ledge and Notice rolls. 
hero’s mouth could drown an armada. 

GLUMSY (MAJOR) 
The blabbermouth can’t keep a secret very 

Your hero is an uncoordinated klutz who trips 
well. He reveals plans and gives away things 

over air and is always the last one picked for 
best kept among friends, usually at the worst 

sports. He subtracts 2 from Athletics and 
possible times. 

Stealth rolls. 

GODE OF HONOR (MAJOR) 
The individual is completely without sight. 

Honor is very important to your character. 
He suffers a —6 to all physical tasks that 

He keeps his word, doesn’t abuse or kill 
require vision (GM's call). On the plus side, 

prisoners, and generally tries to operate 
Blind characters gain their choice of a free 

within his world’s particular notion of proper 
Edge to compensate for this particularly 

gentlemanly or ladylike behavior. 
difficult Hindrance. 

BLOODTHIRSTY (MAJOR) 
It killed the cat, and it might kill 

Your hero never takes prisoners unless 
your warrior as well. Curious 

under the direct supervision of a superior. 
characters have to check out 

His cold-blooded ruthlessness causes 
everything and always want to 

enemies to respond in kind, often costs 
know what's behind a potential 

vital information, creates constant 
mystery or secret. 

enemies, and may get him in trouble 
with his superiors or the authorities, DEATH WISH (MINOR) 
depending on the setting. 

Having a death wish doesn’t 

GAN'T SWIM (MINOR) mean your adventurer is 
suicidal —he might just think 

Most people in the 21st century can 
his life is worth less than some 

swim thanks to swimming pools, 
noble but clearly deadly goal. 

easy travel to lakes and beaches, or 
educational efforts. Historically, how- Those with a Death Wish 

ever, those who weren't raised around don’t throw their lives away for 

a temperate body of water could not. no reason, but when there's a 
chance to complete a goal they 

Characters with this Hindrance 
do anything —and take any 

suffer a —2 penalty to the Athletics 
risk — to achieve it. 

skill when swimming and each inch 
moved in water costs 3” of Pace. See DELUSIONAL (MINOR OR MAJOR) 
Movement (page 92) for more 

Your hero believes something 
details and Drowning (page 126). 

that is considered quite 

GAUTIOUS (MINOR) strange by everyone else. Minor 
Delusions are harmless or the 

This planner personifies restraint 
character generally keeps it to himself 

and carefulness. He never makes 
(the government puts sedatives in 

rash decisions and likes to plot 
soft drinks, dogs can talk, we're all just 

things out in detail long before 
characters in some bizarre game, etc.). 

any action is taken. 
With a Major Delusion, he expresses 

his view on the situation frequently 
Your hero doesn’t pay much and it can occasionally lead to danger 
attention to the world around (the government is run by aliens, 
him and can’t seem to find hospitals are deadly, I'm allergic 
a haystack in a small pile to armor, zombies are my friends). 

of needles. 

SHILOVHVHD 



GREEDY (MINOR OR MAJOR] 
Some people don’t believe in the supernatural A miser measures worth in material 
until they're halfway down some creature’s possessions or wealth. If a Minor Hindrance, 
gullet. Doubting Thomases are skeptics who he argues bitterly for more than his fair share 
try their best to rationalize supernatural of any loot or reward the party might come 
events. They walk right into danger they don’t across. As a Major Hindrance, he fights 
believe in and look for alternate explanations over anything he considers unfair, and may 
to every supernatural event. even kill for it if he feels slighted or covets 
Even after being confronted with undeniable something he cannot have. 

truth, the doubter’s mind eventually begins 
to doubt what he saw, rationalizes it away, or HABIT (MINOR OR MAJOR) 
compartmentalizes the eventas “one of a kind” Your warrior has an annoying or dangerous 
while continuing to doubt the next mystery. compulsion. A Minor Habit irritates those 

around her but isn’t dangerous. Maybe she 
DRIVEN (MINOR OR MAJOR) picks her nose, can’t stop fiddling with her 
A vow is a commitment to others. Driven phone, says “y’know” in the middle of every 
characters want something for themselves. It sentence, or chews and smacks her gum 

may be to protect the realm, becomea  decorated loudly and often. Allies avoid her if possible. 

officer, prove you're the best gladiator in A Major Habit is a physical or mental 
Rome, or the best pilot in the galactic fleet. addiction of some sort that is debilitating 
The Minor version shapes the character and or possibly even deadly. This includes drug 

pushes his decisions but either happens rarely use, chronic drinking, or perhaps even 
or is fairly harmless. As a Major Hindrance an addiction to virtual reality in a high- 

it's an overriding desire that comes up tech setting. 
frequently or causes peril for the heroine and An addict who doesn’t get his fix must make 
those around her. a Vigorroll every 24 hours he goes without or 

take a level of Fatigue (see page 100). 
ELDERLY (MAJOR) Once every 24 hours, a Healing roll with 
Your adventurer is getting on in years, but some sort of appropriate medicine removes 
he’s not quite ready for the nursing home yet. one level of Fatigue for four hours. After that 
His Pace is reduced by 1, and he subtracts the Fatigue returns and can only be recovered 
1 from running rolls (minimum 1). He also with the addicting substance. 
suffers a —1 penalty to Agility, Strength, and 
Vigor rolls, but not their linked skills. 

On the plus side, the wisdom of his years Characters who have lost some or all of their 
grants the hero 5 extra skill points which may hearing have this disadvantage. As a Minor 
be used for any skills linked to Smarts. Hindrance, it subtracts 4 from all Notice 

rolls made to hear, including awaking due 
to loud noises. A Major Hindrance means 

Someone out there hates the character and the character is deaf. She cannot hear and 
wants him ruined, locked away, or dead. automatically fails all Notice rolls that 
The value of the Hindrance depends on how depend on hearing. 
powerful the enemy is and how often he might Hearing aids reduce the penalty by 2, but 
show up. A Minor Enemy might be a lone require batteries and have a 50% chance of 
gunslinger out for vengeance or a betrayed falling out when he’s Wounded, falls, or 
brotherhood that’s deadly but appears rarely. suffers some other trauma. 
A Major Enemy might represent powerful 
authorities, aband of outlaws, or a single very HEROIC (MAJOR) 
powerful and relentless rival. This noble soul never says no to a person in 

If the enemy is one day defeated, the GM need. She doesn’t have to be happy about it, 
should gradually work in a replacement, but she always comes to the rescue of those 
or the hero may buy off the Hindrance by she feels can’t help themselves. She's the first 
sacrificing an Advance. 

24 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



one to run into a burning building, usually to come to their friends’ rescue when they're 
agrees to hunt monsters for little or no pay, threatened. 
and is generally a pushover for a sob story. 

HESITANT [MINOR] This curmudgeon is ill-tempered and 
Your hero hesitates in stressful situations. disagreeable. He has trouble doing anything 
Draw two Action Cards in combat and act kind for anyone else, must be paid for his 
on the lowest. If you draw a Joker, use it troubles, and doesn’t accept awards or favors 
normally and ignore the Hindrance for the graciously. Besides the obvious roleplaying 
round (hence this being a Minor Hindrance, issues, Mean characters subtract 1 from 
it actually increases your chances of Persuasion rolls. 
drawing a Joker!) 
Hesitant characters cannot take the Quick MILD MANNERED (MINOR) 

or Level Headed Edges. Your milquetoast just isn’t threatening. 
Maybe he’s a little doughy around the middle, 

ILLITERATE [MINOR] has a kind face, or a soft voice. Whatever the 

Your hero cannot read. He can sign his issue, he has a hard time looking tough. He 
name and knows what a STOP sign says, subtracts 2 when making Intimidation rolls. 
but little else. He also doesn’t know much 
about math. He can probably do 2+2=4, but 
multiplication and the like are beyond him. Due to trauma or birth, your character has lost 

the ability to speak. He can write messages 
Illiterate characters can’t read or write in 

to others when needed, use sign language, or 
any language, by the way, no matter how 

some combination of visual communication. 
many they actually speak. 

Vison-based communication may require a 
Notice roll to perceive correctly (illumination 

The daredevil almost always leaps before he and similar penalties apply). 
looks. He rarely thinks things through before 
taking action. 

Those who carry their weight well have the 
Brawny Edge. Those who don’t are Obese. A 

Insecurity leads to envy of others’ accomplish- character cannot be both Brawny and Obese, 

ments or being overly possessive of what and this Hindrance can’t increase your 
this disgruntled soul feels belongs to him. Size above +3. 

He often complains, pouts, covets others’ An Obese hero's Size (and therefore 
possessions or accolades, claims credit for Toughness) increase by +1. His Pace is 
another's work, disobeys commands, and reduced by 1, and his running die one die 
generally causes problems. type (minimum d4). Strength is considered 
As a Minor Hindrance, the character's one die type less (minimum d4) for armor 

jealousy is focused on one particular subject and worn gear (not weapons). They may also 
(such as his “unrivaled” skill as a pilot or a have difficulty finding armor or clothing that 
romantic interest). fits or entering confined spaces. 

As a Major Hindrance, the character is 
jealous of anyone and everyone he feels 

Your hero has a responsibility she must attend 
outshines him. He consistently bad-mouths 

to on a daily or regular basis. It could be a 
his rivals, tries to upstage them, or actively 

job, volunteer work, taking care of family or 
plots to discredit those who threaten his ego. 

friends, etc. 

The Obligation consumes about 20 hours 
This stalwart defender risks her life for her most weeks, or 40+ for the Major version. 

friends without hesitation. Some Loyal Exactly what that entails should be discussed 
heroes may not act that way, but are the first between the player and the Game Master. 

SHILOVHVHD 



Note that undeniably evil creatures, undead, 

By birth or battle, your hero has lost an arm. demons, and the like are fair game even for 

Fortunately, his other arm is (now) his “good” Major Pacifists! 

one. Tasks that require two hands, such as 
some Athletics rolls (GM's call) or using a 
two-handed weapon, suffer a 4 modifier. Phobias are overwhelming and irrational 

fears that plague a hero’s psyche. 
Whenever a character is in the presence of 

This veteran lost an eye and has trouble with his phobia (GM'’s call, but generally sight), 
depth perception. He subtracts 2 from any he subtracts 1 from all his Trait rolls if it's a 
Trait roll dependent on vision and more than Minor Hindrance, and 2 if it’s Major. 
5" (10 yards) distant. Phobias shouldn't be too obvious — 

everyone should be afraid of vampires, for 
OUTSIDER (MINOR OR MAJOR) example, so it’s not a phobia, it’s common 
In a society made up of only a few types of sense. Instead, the phobia usually centers on 
people, your hero isn’t one of them. A Native some random element the mind associates 
American in a Western town, an alien in a with the event. Remember, phobias are 
scifi game of human marines, or a half-orc in irrational fears. 
a party of elves, dwarves, and humans are all 
examples. Locals are likely to raise prices on POVERTY (MINOR) 
her, ignore pleas for help, and generally treat It’s said a fool and his money are soon parted. 
her as lower class. Your hero is one of them. He starts with half 
Outsiders subtract 2 from Persuasion the usual money for your setting and just 

rolls made to influence those who aren’t her can’t seem to hang on to funds acquired after 
own kind. The Major version also means play begins. In general, the player halves his 
the character has few or no legal rights in total funds every game week. 
the main campaign area. She might be a 
different species among xenophobes, the 
civilization may be cruel and unenlightened This individual has some minor foible that is 
toward strangers, or she might even be an usually humorous but can occasionally cause 
artificial intelligence whose sapience isn’t him real trouble. A swashbuckler may always 
acknowledged by the law. try to slash his initials on his foes, a dwarf 

may brag constantly about his culture, or a 
OVERGONHDENT [MAJOR] snobby débutante might not eat, drink, or 
There's nothing out there your hero can’t socialize with the lower class, for example. 
defeat. At least that's what he thinks. He 
believes he can do most anything and never RUTHLESS (MINOR OR MAJOR) 
wants to retreat from a challenge. He's not The fanatic will do most anything to 
suicidal, but he certainly takes on more than accomplish her goals. As a Major Hindrance, 
common sense dictates. she harms anyone and everyone who gets in 

her way. As a Minor Hindrance, she stops 
PAGIFIST [MINOR OR MAJOR) short of true harm to anyone except those 
Your hero absolutely despises violence. Minor who directly oppose her. 
pacifism means he only fights when given no 
other choice and never allows the killing of SEGRET (MINOR OR MAJOR) 
prisoners or other defenseless victims. Your hero has a secret she keeps to protect 
Major Pacifists won't fight living characters herself or others. As a Minor Hindrance, the 

under any circumstances. They may defend secret is troublesome but not life-threatening. 

themselves, but won't do anything to The Major version would cause severe 
permanently harm sapient, living creatures. problems if discovered. If it ever becomes 
They may use nonlethal methods (see page public knowledge, she should trade it 
104), but only in self-defense or the defense for Enemy, Shamed, Wanted, or another 
of others. appropriate Hindrance approved by the GM. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



PB 
2 
m 
= 
wv 

Prosthesis: A character with the Minor 

Something haunts your adventurer. Maybe version of this Hindrance may have a 
he made a vow he didn’t keep. Maybe he was prosthesis. If the prosthesis is lost, he suffers 
defeated in an honorable fight and ordered the effects of the Major version of Slow. 
the death of his foe anyway for some greater Wheelchairs: From about the Victorian 
principle. Maybe he isn’t actually cowardly era forward, Slow heroes may start with a 
but once ran from a battle and left others to die. manual wheelchair at no cost. In the modern 

As a Minor Hindrance, the shameful era (1980s and on), the character may also 

circumstances aren't generally know— nit choose from an ultralight or powered chair. 
just haunts the hero. He might go out of his All wheelchairs require reasonably smooth 
way, against all reason, not to repeat the ground to operate (GM's call). 
mistake. Or he might give in to the same set ® MANUAL: Pace is half Athletics die (max of 
of circumstances and hate himself for it. 3) and cannot run. 
As a Major Hindrance, his deed is well- ® ULTRALIGHT: Pace is half Athletics die and 
known—  or at least known among those may run at d4 (Minor) or d4-1 (Major). 
he cares about. The other player characters 

m POWERED: Pace 6 on flat, even ground, 
should be told the tale as soon as possible 

Pace 3 on uneven ground, cannot run. 
(preferably at character creation). If not, it 

Most powered chairs can go about 10 miles 
should be revealed by nonplayer characters 

before requiring a recharge. 
at some point, and occasionally used 
against the hero. 

SLOW [MINOR OR MAJOR) This adventurer is very skinny, very short, or 
both. His Size (see page 106) is reduced by 1, 

A disability or past injury has hindered 
which reduces his Toughness as well. 

this hero's mobility. As a Minor Hindrance, 
reduce his Pace by 1 and his running die one Size can’t be reduced below -1, but the 

step (if already d4, reduce to d4-1). As a Toughness penalty remains. A Small half-folk, 
Major Hindrance, reduce the running die a for example, remains Size —1 and loses a point 
step, Pace by 2, and subtract 2 from Athletics of Toughness. 
rolls and rolls to resist Athletics (such as Tests 
or Grappling). 

Stubborn individuals always want their way 
Slow characters may not take the Fleet- 

and never admit theyre wrong. Even when 
Footed Edge. 

it’s painfully obvious they've made a mistake 



they try to justify it with half-truths and The danger in fulfilling the Vow and how 
rationalizations. often it might occur determines the level of 

the Hindrance. A Minor Vow might be to 
SUSPICIOUS [MINOR OR MAJOR) serve an order with a broad mandate that 
Your character is suspicious of everyone. rarely conflicts with the party’s goals. 
As a Minor Hindrance, his paranoia causes A Major Vow makes long-term and frequent 
frequent trust issues. He might demand full demands on the servant's time and results in 
payment before doing a task, want every great risks to his life. 
agreement in writing, or believe even his 
friends are out to get him. WANTED [MINOR OR MAJOR) 
As a Major Hindrance, Support rolls to aid Your hero has committed some crime and will 

} the distrustful individual are made at -2. be arrested if discovered by the authorities. 
This assumes the setting actually has laws 

THIN SKINNED (MINOR OR MAJOR) and police officers to enforce them. 
Personal attacks really get under this The level of the Hindrance depends on 
individual's skin. As a Minor Hindrance, he how serious the crime was and how active 
subtracts 2 when resisting Taunt attacks. As the hunters are. A hero with numerous 
a Major, he subtracts 4. unpaid parking tickets (in a game where 

he might have to drive occasionally) has a 
TONGUE-TIED [MAJOR] Minor Hindrance, as does someone wanted 
Your adventurer flubs cool lines (or thinks of for more serious crimes away from the main 
them afterwards!), goes off on tangents when campaign area. Being accused of murder is 
he’s trying to talk someone into something, a Major Hindrance in almost any setting if 
and generally miscommunicates most there’s someone around to seek justice (or 
everything he says. vengeance). 
He suffers a —1 penalty to Intimidation, 

Performance, Persuasion, and Taunt rolls that YELLOW (MAJOR) 
involve speech. Not everyone has ice water in their veins. 

Your hero is squeamish at the sight of blood 
UGLY [MINOR OR MAJOR) and gore and terrified of coming to harm. 
Attractive people get all the breaks. This He subtracts 2 from Fear checks and when 
unfortunate individual isn’t one of them. He resisting Intimidation. 
subtracts 1 from his Persuasion rolls, or 2 if 
taken as a Major Hindrance. 

The hero is 12-15 years old (in human years — 
VENGEFUL [MINOR OR MAJOR) adjust this for other races). He has only 4 
Payback is...well...bad news for someone, points to adjust his attributes instead of 5, and 
and this adventurer is going to get it. 10 skill points instead of 12. He may also have 
As a Minor Hindrance she usually seeks legal restrictions depending on the setting 

vengeance legally. The method varies by (can’t drive, own a firearm, and so on). 

situation. Some plot and scheme for months On the plus side, youths have a fair amount 
while others demand immediate results. of luck. They draw one extra Benny at the 
Those with the Major version of this beginning of each game session (this stacks 

Hindrance don’t let anything prevent them with other Edges such Luck or Great Luck). 
from a reckoning. This doesn’t mean they Most Young characters should also take the 
immediately resort to violence, but their Small Hindrance, but it’s not mandatory. 
actions always escalate until total and As a Major Hindrance, the characteris Very 
complete satisfaction is achieved. Young (8 to 11 years old). He has only 3 points 

for attributes and 10 for skills, and the Small 
VOW (MINOR OR MAJOR) Hindrance. Very Young heroes draw two 
The character has sworn an oath to someone extra Bennies at the start of each session. 
or something he believes in. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



* Derive secondary statistics such as Tough- 

TRAITS ness or melee damage. 
* Resist effects such as being grappled or 
counter spells, powers, or social attacks 

” 
Characters are defined by their “Traits, such as Taunt or Intimidation. 
attributes and skills ranked by die types. A 
dé6 is average, while higher die types reflect 
much greater ability. SKILLS 
Attributes are primarily passive or innate Heroes have 12 points to buy skills during 2] 

fa of 
abilities used for resisting effects like fear character creation. A skill that’s below = 
or supernatural attacks. Skills are used to the linked attribute (noted in parentheses pee 

actively do things or affect others. beside the skill name) is cheaper to increase = 
n~N than one that's at or above it. See page 55  

Exceptions occur, but these are the 
for Character Creation and page 54 for m 

foundational differences between the x 
Advancement. [7] 

two concepts. 
Core skills are marked with a red star, and 

ATTRIBUTES start at d4 for player characters (see page 10). 
Characters can attempt skills they don’t 

Attributes don’t directly affect skill rolls. have but it’s more difficult. See Unskilled 
Savage Worlds treats learned knowledge Attempts on page 89. 
and training as the most relevant and direct 
factors. A high attribute allows one to increase AGADEMIGS (SMARTS) 
a skill faster and opens up options to Edges Academics reflects knowledge of the liberal 
that greatly differentiate two characters with arts, social sciences, literature, history, 
the same skill. archaeology, and similar fields. If an explorer 
Every character starts with a d4 in each of wants to remember when the Mayan calendar 

five attributes: ended or cite a line from Macbeth, this is the 

Agility is a measure of a character's nimble- skill to have. 

ness, dexterity, and general coordination. 
ATHLETICS (AGILITY) 

Smarts measures raw intelligence, mental 
Athletics combines an individual's coordin- 

acuity, and how fast a heroine thinks on her 
ation with learned skills such as climbing, 

feet. It's used to resist certain types of mental 
jumping, balancing, biking, wrestling, skiing, 

and social attacks. 
swimming, throwing, or catching. Characters 

Spirit is self-confidence, backbone, and who rely on physical power more than 
willpower. It's used to resist social and coordination can take the Brute Edge (page 
supernatural attacks as well as fear. 38) to link this skill to Strength instead 
Strength is physical power and fitness. It's of Agility. 

also used as the basis of a warrior’s damage in 
hand-to-hand combat, and to determine how BATTLE [SMARTS] 
much he can wear or carry. Battle is an individual's command of strategy 
Vigor represents an individual's endurance, and tactics. It can be used for general military 

resistance to disease, poison, or toxins, and knowledge and is critical when commanding 
how much physical damage she can take troops in Mass Battles (see page 131). 

before she can’t go on. It is most often used 
to resist Fatigue effects, and as the basis for BOATING [AGILITY] 
the derived stat of Toughness. Characters with this skill can handle most any 

boat or ship common to their setting. They 
USING ATTRIBUTES also know how to handle common tasks 
Attributes are used to: associated with their vessel such as tying 

knots, rigging sails, or following currents. 
* Determine how fast skills increase during 
Advancement (page 54). 

* Limit access to Edges (page 37). 



(Bikes and other self-powered transports use 
SKILL GHANGES IN THIS | Athletics, beast-drawn transports use Riding.) 

[72] Characters in modern settings where 
[=] EDITION OF SAVAGE WORLDS 
pu vehicles are ubiquitous don’t need Driving 
[+4 Here's a summary of the most important for ordinary travel. Driving rolls are typically 
o skill changes in this edition of Savage Worlds. 
S only needed in dangerous or stressful 

conditions, such as Chases (page 113). 
[2] 

& Every hero starts with a d4 in five basic ELEGTRONIGS [SMARTS] 
= abilities: Athletics, Common Knowledge, Electronics allows a hero to use complex or 
0 Notice, Persuasion, and Stealth. A d4 specialized devices such as the control panels 

doesn’t mean they're good at these skills, on industrial machines or the sensor systems 
but they have some basic experience found on spaceships in futuristic settings. 
with them. Consumer or electronic devices common 

to the setting don’t require Electronics— 
MAJOR CHANGES: 

Common Knowledge suffices if a roll is 
® Charisma was removed from the game. 

required at all. In the modern world, this 
* Climbing has been folded into Athletics. 

applies to video recorders, cell phones, etc. 
e Common Knowledge is now its own 

skill rather than a Smarts roll. Fixing any type of broken electronic device 
e Investigation is now Research to make | uses the Repair skill (see page 34). 

its meaning and usage more clear. 
* Focus is a new skill for the Gifted Arcane FAITH [SPIRIT] 
Background. Faith is the arcane skill required for 

* Knowledge has been broken down Arcane Background (Miracles), described 
into the separate skills used in most on page 148. 
campaigns. Specifically: Academics, 
Battle, Electronics, Hacking, Language, FIGHTING (AGILITY) 
Occult, and Science. Fighting covers all hand-to-hand (melee) 

* Lockpicking is now part of Thievery, attacks, whether it’s with fists, axes, laser 

which also handles pickpocketing, swords, or martial arts. See Chapter Three for 
sleight of hand, safecracking, and other the combat rules and the various maneuvers 
roguish tricks. a warrior might attempt. 

* Performance is a new skill. 
* Repair and its use are better defined. | FOGUS [SPIRIT] 
* Streetwise is now an Edge. Focus is the arcane skill for Arcane 

* Swimming is handled by Athletics. Background (Gifted), see page 148. 
* Throwing is covered by Athletics. 
Tracking is now part of Survival. GAMBLING (SMARTS) 

Gambling is common in the saloons of 
EP pin the Old West, the back rooms of criminal 

organizations, the barracks of most armies, 

COMMON KNOWLEDGE (SMARTS) or the flight decks of scifi spaceships. 

Characters roll Common Knowledge to know To simulate an hour of gambling without 

people, places, and things of their world, having to roll for every single toss of the 

including etiquette, geography, culture, dice or hand of cards, have everyone agree 

popular technology, contacts, and customs. on the stakes, such as $10, 10 gold coins, etc. 
Everyone in the game then makes a Gambling 

DRIVING (AGILITY) roll. The lowest total pays the highest total 

Driving allows a hero to control any powered the difference times the stake. The next lowest 

ground vehicle common to his setting. This pays the second highest the difference times 

includes cars, motorcycles, tanks, and the like. the stake, and so on. If there's an odd man left 
in the middle, he breaks even. 



Example: Red rolls highest with a 10 and Gabe A raise might mean he backs down for the 
rolls lowest witha 4. The difference is 6, so Gabe remainder of the scene, spills all the beans, or 
pays Red 6 x the stake of $10, or $60. runs away as fast as he can. 

Cheating: A character who cheats adds In or out of combat, a Critical Failure 

+2 to his roll. The GM may raise or lower means the target is immune to this character's 
this modifier depending on the particulars Intimidation attempts for the remainder of 
of the game or the method of cheating. If this encounter! 

a cheater rolls a Critical Failure, however, Networking: Intimidation can also be used 
he’s caught. The consequences depend on as a “macro” skill to simulate several hours 
the circumstances and who noticed, but are of working the streets. See Networking on 
usually unpleasant! page 133 to see how to crack some heads for 

favors or information. 
HACKING [SMARTS] 
Hacking is the skill used to create programs LANGUAGE [SMARTS] 
and “hack” into secured systems. Use of this In some settings, such as those that focus on 
skill always requires a computer or interface pulp action or “planetary romance” (where 
of some sort. characters frequently travel among many 
Most tasks are a simple Hacking roll. The strange civilizations), speaking various 

amount of time it takes is determined by the languages can simply be roleplayed with 
GM, from a single action to hours, days, or halting dialogue and campy accents that start 
even months depending on the complexity of out a little difficult and are quickly forgotten. 
the project. Success means the attempt works The GM may ignore this skill altogether in 
as desired and a raise halves the time required. these settings, or use the Multiple Languages 

Failure usually just means the hacker must try Setting Rule on page 140. 
again, while a Critical Failure may mean the In more realistic settings, communication 
system locks the user out, issues an alarm, or can be a major barrier that requires characters 
enacts another countermeasure of some sort. to put skill points into additional languages. 

In a 1980s World War Three game, for example, 
HEALING [SMARTS] a group of United Nations paratroopers 
Healing has multiple uses, from treating won't be able to speak with their foes unless 
Wounds to diagnosing diseases and analyzing they take Russian, Polish, or other languages 
certain kinds of forensic evidence. common to the Warsaw Pact. 
See page 96 for rules on mending and If the Language skill is in use, it should 

treating Wounds, and page 128 for treatment be listed as Language (Spanish), Language 
of disease or poison. (American Sign Language), etc. A character's 

Forensics: Healing can also be used to die type also notes how fluent he is in it. 
analyze evidence that relates to anatomical (Characters start with a d8 in their own 

trauma, including cause and time of death, Language.) 

angle of attack, and similar matters. Success 
provides basic information and a raise LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY 
increases the details uncovered. SKILL ABILITY 

di The character can read, write, and 
INTIMIDATION (SPIRIT) speak common words and phrases. 

Intimidation is the art of frightening an dé The speaker can carry ona prolonged 
opponent so that he backs down, reveals but occasionally halting conversation. 
information, or flees. 

ds The character can speak fluently. 
Intimidation is an opposed roll resisted by 

The hero can mimic other dialects 
the opponent's Spirit. In combat, thisis a Test 410 within the language. 
(see page 108). Out of combat, a successful 

The speaker can masterfully recite 
roll means the foe backs down for the most 

412 important literary or oral works. 
part, reveals some information, or slinks 
away when the opportunity presents itself. 

SHILOVHVHD 



Limited: Use whichever skill is lowest when 
GREATING OTHER SKILLS 3 performing an action that requires knowledge 

of a foreign language. Intimidation (if verbal), 
Game Masters can create any skill they E 

Persuasion, Research, Taunt, etc., are all 
want or need for their setting. If the skill 
has defined uses, she should work out limited by the character's Language skill. 

exactly how it functions. If navigating This limitation never applies to a character's 
the stars is a big part of your planetary native tongue. 
romance campaign and you don’t think 
the Electronics skill covers use of the Yc NOTIGE (SMARTS) 
navigational systems, for example, you ¢ Notice is a hero's general awareness and 
might want to add Astrogation. alertness. It's used to sense sights, sounds, 

tastes, and smells, spot clues, detectambushes, 
Players can also add their own specialty 

spot hidden weapons on a foe, or tell if a rival 
skills (with the GM’s approval). These 

is lying, frightened, happy, etc. 
aren't likely to come up much in most 
settings, however, unless the player Success conveys basic informatio—n  the 
proactively looks for ways to use them. character hears movement in the forest, 

smells distant smoke, or senses someone isn’t 
Example: In Deadlands: Hell on Earth, being completely truthful. 
the heroes must rally the town against an 

A raise grants more detail, such as the 
approaching mutant horde. Emily has a skill 

direction of a sound or odor or what topic a 
of her own creation, Journalism. She decides 

person is avoiding or lying about. 
to use it to write an emotional article and 
print it up for everyone in the settlement to OGEULT [SMARTS] 
read. She gets a raise and the GM decides 

Occult reflects knowledge and experience 
| the entire town rallies to the defenders’ side. 

with the paranormal most others don’t even 
believe exists. It can be used to decipher 

SKILL PHILOSOPHY strange pictograms, recall information about 
New players sometimes focus on some supernatural creatures, remember cures 
skills being so broad — such as Fighting for monstrous maladies like lycanthropy or 
or Shooting — and trying to make all other vampirism, or perform rituals. 
skills equally so. But the primary goal of Finding information in a library, newspaper 
the skill system is to create and support morgue, old tome, the internet, etc., uses the 
character tropes. A shooter, whether he’s a Research skill. As noted there, however, if the 
sniper or a bowman, is ubiquitous across investigator's Occult skill is higher she may 
many settings and all use a single ability — use that instead. See Research on page 34. 
being able to fire weapons accurately. You 
don’t need a skill for firearms and another PERFORMANGE [SPIRIT] 
for bows to reinforce those character tropes. A good entertainer can lift the spirits, rally a 
Investigators do need many different crowd to action, or simply earn a few bucks 

skills, however, because they do things in from the locals. Specifics depend on the 
completely different ways. A hard-nosed situation, setting, and how well the character 
detective needs Intimidation to work the is known in the area. 
streets, socialites mingle with high society, Performance covers singing, acting, playing 
bookworms hit the library, and computer an instrument, or similar tasks that require an 
geeks use Hacking to get what they want. audience to appreciate. 
Also, some skills just don’t make sense Raising Funds: The amount of money a 
when combined. You could combine character can raise by performing is extremely 
Boating, Driving, and Piloting into subjective, but as a general rule a successful 
“Vehicles,” for example, but then every performance raises 20% of the setting’s 

: ‘modern day person who can drive a car Starting Funds with a success and 30% with 
f coul d fly a plane. Consider that when a raise. The GM can multiply this amount 

by the performer's Rank if she feels it's 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



appropriate. These numbers work for typical PILOTING [AGILITY] 
performers who might be known in a small Piloting allows a character to maneuver 
establishment or area. Larger performances airplanes, helicopters, jet packs, or spaceships. 
can greatly boost the performer’s fee, but also Rules for Chases and vehicular combat can be 
require more time, energy, and setup. found in Chapter Four. 
Deception: Performance can be used A being with the innate ability to fly (he has 

instead of Persuasion if the character is wings, for example) uses Athletics instead. 
attempting to deceive, bluff, or disguise 
herself and the GM agrees it makes sense in PSIONIGS (SMARTS) 
the context of the situation. This is the skill “psions” or “psis” use to 

activate and control their psionic abilities. 
PERSUASION [SPIRIT] See the Arcane Background (Psionics) Edge 

Persuasion is the ability to convince others to on page 148. 
do what you want through reason, cajoling, 
deception, rewards, or other friendly means. 
Persuasion isn’t mind control. It can change REACTIONS 
someone’s attitude but not their goals. A If the situation doesn’t dictate an initial 
bandit may let you keep a sentimental piece attitude for a nonplayer character, the GM 
of jewelry with a good Persuasion roll but still can use the table below. In a mixed group, 
takes all your other goods. the GM can use the average attitude, that 

When used to Support allies (page 106) of whoever does most of the talking, or 

it's an unopposed roll. If the target is resistant, whoever leads the target group. 

it’s an opposed roll vs. the target's Spirit. The REACTION TABLE 
GM should modify the roll as she sees fit 
based on roleplaying, any pertinent Edges or INITIAL REACTION 

Hindrances that affect the conversation, and Hostile: The target is openly 
the circumstances. hostile. He may attack if possible, 

or otherwise betray, report on, 
Reaction Level: How much a person is 2 or hinder the party at the first 

willing to cooperate depends largely on their opportunity. He doesn’t help 
attitude toward whoever’s talking to them. | without an overwhelming reward 
The Game Master can decide how nonplayer or threat of some kind. 

characters feel based on the setting, or roll on Unfriendly: The character isn't 
the Reaction Table (see sidebar) if she has no 3 interested in helping unless he 

preconceived notions. has little choice and/or is offered a 
substantial payment or reward. 

Success improves the target's attitude one 
Uncooperative: The target isn't 

level and a raise improves it two. Further interested in getting involved unless 
increases aren't generally possible in the 4-5 there's a significant advantage to 
same encounter — it takes individuals a little himself. 
time to adjust their biases. Neutral: The character has no 

Failure means the target won't change his particular attitude toward the 
6-8 

mind this scene or until the situation changes group. He expects fair payment for 
any sort of favor or information. 

in some important way. A Critical Failure 
also reduces the target's attitude two levels. Cooperative: The character is 

generally sympathetic. He helps 
Only one roll should generally be allowed 9-10 

if he can for a small fee, favor, or 
per interaction unless new information is kindness. \ 

revealed, a substantial reward is offered, etc. Friendly: The individual goes out of 

Networking: Characters can also use his way for the hero. He likely does 
11 simple tasks for very little, and is 

Persuasion as a “macro skill,” simulating a 
willing to do more dangerous tasks 

few hours or an evening's time hobnobbing for fair pay or other favors. 
and socializing to gain favors or information. 

. Helpful: The target is anxious to 
See Networking on page 133. 12 help the hero and probably does so 

—for little or no reward. 

SHILOVHVHD 



morgues, the internet, or other written 

Repair is the ability to take apart and/or fix sources of information. 

mechanical gadgets, vehicles, weapons, and The amount of time this takes is up to the 
simple electrical devices. It also covers the GM and the situation. Finding something on 
use of demolitions and explosives. the internet or a specific passage in a book 
How long a Repair roll takes is up to the might be possible in a combat round. Looking 

GM and the complexity of the task. Fixing a through books in a library, searching the 
Wound on a compact car in a post-apocalyptic internet for a complex topic, or digging up 

setting might take an hour. Fixing a Wound background information on an individual 
on the same car in the present day might take usually takes about an hour. 
four hours if the character wants it painted, Success finds basic information and a raise 
polished, etc. Success means the item is provides more detail. Failure means the 
functional. A raise on the Repair roll halves researcher doesn’t find what she’s looking for. 
the time required. A Critical Failure might mean the researcher 
Tools: Characters suffer a minor penalty (-1 finds plausible but incorrect information, 

to -2) to their roll if they don’t have access to triggers the notice of some opposed entity 
basic tools, or a major penalty (-3 to —4) if the or faction, reads something “Humanity Was 
device requires specialized equipment. Not Meant to Know” and suffers a mental 

Electronics: Repair can be used to repair illness of some sort (a Minor Phobia, Quirk, 

electronic devices, but is limited by the hero's etc.), or she might even accidentally destroy 
Electronics skill. Use whichever skill is lowest. the source. The GM is encouraged to be 

creative when such a mishap occurs, perhaps 
Weird Science: Repair cannot be used to fix 

forcing the party to approach the situation in 
arcane devices — that must be done with the 

a different way. 
Weird Science skill (page 36). 

Related Skills: If a character has a skill that 
RESEARGH (SMARTS) relates directly to the subject he’s researching, 
A character skilled in Research knows how he can use that instead of Research. An 
to make good use of libraries, newspaper explorer with Occult d10 and Research d6, 

for example, rolls a d10 when investigating 
vampire lore at a forgotten library. If he later 

eeceecececeeceecceceeceeceece goes to search for the deed to a house where 
the vampires are rumored to lair, he rolls his 

GOMPREHENSIVE MODIFIERS normal Research instead. 

Previous editions of Savage Worlds listed a Note: Research may only provide the clues, 

host of modifiers for things like Stealth and especially in a mystery-heavy game. Putting 

Tracking (now part of Survival). We've the clues together from the information 

foregone those tables in this edition for a gathered is up to the players. 

more subjective stance that allows the GM 
to look at the entire situation — something RIDING [AGILITY] 
we can’t sum up in a table —and assign Riding allows a hero to mount, control, 

a bonus or penalty on her own, usually and ride any beast or beast-drawn vehicle 

from +4 to —4. common to his setting. This includes horses, 
camels, dragons, wagons, chariots, and the 

This allows her to consider all the 
like. See the rules for Mounted Combat 

factors more generally, especially those on page 103. 
that overlap (like dual penalties for rain 
or darkness that both limit visibility and 
therefore shouldn't stack) and sum them Those with this skill have studied various 
up quickly and easily without having hard sciences such as biology, xenobiology, 
to consult a table in the middle of a chemistry, geology, engineering, or any other 
tense scene. “hard” science. 
ET ETTE, 

34 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



A successful Science roll reveals basic Out of combat, the distance moved depends 
information about a topic, and a raise grants entirely on the situation. The GM might want 
more details. a roll every minute if the group is sneaking 

around the perimeter of a defensive position, 
SHOOTING (AGILITY) or every few miles if they're trying to quietly 
Shooting covers all attempts to hit a target walk the path through a dark forest without 
with a ranged weapon such as a bow, pistol, alerting the creatures that live there. 
or rocket launcher (thrown weapons use 
Athletics, page 29). See Chapter Three for SURVIVAL [SMARTS] 
details on ranged combat. Survival allows a character to find food, water, 

or shelter in hostile environments. It can also 
be used to navigate wilderness environments, 

Mages, wizards, warlocks, and witches use figure out which plants are good to eat and 
Spellcasting to cast spells. See the Arcane which aren't, and so on. 
Background (Magic) Edge on page 148. A successful Survival roll provides enough 

food and water for one person for one day; or 
Yc STEALTH (AGILITY) five people with a raise. 
Stealth is the ability to hide and move quietly. 

More detailed information on Hunger 
A simple success on a Stealth roll means the 

and Thirst can be found under Hazards 
character avoids detection if enemies aren't 

on page 125. 
particularly alert. If the character fails the 
roll, the enemy realizes something is amiss Tracking: Survival can also be used to 
and begins actively searching for whatever detect and follow tracks. Each roll generally 
roused them. covers following the tracks for one mile, but 

the GM should adjust this as needed for 
Once foes are alerted and active, Stealth is 

specific circumstances. 
opposed by Notice (a group roll if there are 
many foes, see page 89). The Game Master should assign a bonus 

or penalty based on the target, environment, 
The GM should apply any circumstantial 

and time. Tracking a large group that recently 
penalties to Notice rolls for darkness, cover, 

passed through a snow-covered area might 
noise, distractions, and any difference in the 

grant a bonus of +4, while following a single 
target's Scale (just like when attacking, see 

person over rocks and streams after more 
Scale on page 106). Sneaking through dry 

than a day incurs a —4 penalty. 
leaves might subtract 2 from the Stealth roll, 
for example, while spotting someone in the TAUNT [SMARTS] 
dark uses the Illumination penalty listed on 

Taunt attacks a person's pride through 
page 102 (-4). Don’t apply the same modifier 

ridicule, cruel jests, or oneupmanship. 
to both rolls, however. If Stealth is at-2 for the 
leaves, don’t give Notice a +2 for them as well. Taunt is an opposed roll resisted by the 

opponent's Smarts. In combat, this is a Test 
Sneak Attack: Sneaking up close enough 

(see page 108). 
to make a melee attack always requires an 
opposed Stealth roll versus the target's Out of combat, success means the defender 

Notice, whether the guard is actively looking backs down, slinks away, or starts a fight. A 

for trouble or not. If successful, the victim is raise might leave the victim cowed for the 
Vulnerable (page 100) to the attacker, but remainder of the scene, or make her storm 

only until the attacker's turn ends. With out of the area fuming or even in tears, or 
a raise, the attacker has The Drop (page attack her tormentor recklessly (perhaps with 
100) instead. a Wild Attack on the first round of combat). 

Movement: In combat, characters roll A Critical Failure means the target is 
Stealth each turn as a free action at the end of immune to this character's Taunts for the 

their move or any action the GM thinks might remainder of the encounter. 

draw attention. 

SHILOVHVYHD 



(Ve¢ ol Of TENE Sh Bb AF SS 
FAMILIARIZATION 

If it’s dramatically appropriate to show that a character is out of his element with the 
particularuse of a skill — such as picking up analien weapon and trying to make a Shooting 
attack with it— the GM should simply apply a penalty (usually 2 to —4) to the total. 
When to do this, and how large the penalty is, depends entirely on the situation. A 

gunslinger might suffer a penalty when using a bow, for example, at least until he’s 
had a day or two to practice. A professor might suffer a —4 to a Science roll if the player 
specifically says he’s a world famous chemist when the check the GM has called for 
concerns Paleozoic geology. (Though that’s a great time to award a Benny if the player 
roleplays his lack of knowledge!) 
How long a penalty lasts under repeated use depends on the skill in question. Physical 

penalties likely fade after a day or so of practice. Penalties for knowledge-based skills are 
removed if the character spends time researching the subject matter and has access to 
suitable materials. A French literature major who has time to study up on her Shakespeare, 
for example, shouldn't suffer a penalty to her Academics. 
In summary, use familiarization penalties for dramatic use or to illustrate differences 

in cultures or technology levels. Even then, keep the story moving and don’t get bogged 
down in the minutiae. J 

Ne— LL _— PY 

THIEVERY (AGILITY) Limited: Using Thievery on an electronic 
Lockpicking, safecracking, picking pockets, device, such as a keypad, is limited by the 
sleight of hand, setting and disabling thief’s Electronics skill. Use the lowest of the 
traps and similar acts of misdirection, two skills. 

sabotage, subterfuge, and manipulation are 
called Thievery. WEIRD SGIENGE (SMARTS) 

“Mad” scientists, inventors in worlds with 
If used to pick a lock, crack a safe, disable a 

magic (or technology far beyond our 
trap, or perform a simple unopposed action, 

own), alchemists, or artificers can be found 
success opens or disables the device, and a 

throughout many Savage Worlds. 
raise does it in less time, without tripping 
alarms, or whatever else the GM feels is Though their techniques may vary, all 
appropriate. use Weird Science as their arcane skill. See 

the Arcane Background (Weird Science) 
Sleight of hand, hiding or planting an item, 

Edge on page 148 to learn more of their 
or picking a pocket require a simple success. 

wondrous ways. 
If foes are actively watching the character, 
Thievery is opposed by Notice. 
The Game Master should assign penalties 

for particularly difficult circumstances. 
Picking a heavy padlock might have a —4 
penalty, while hiding a revolver in bulky 
winter clothing might grant a +1 bonus. 
Failure typically means the character is 
spotted or it takes too much time (after which 
the character can try again). A Critical Failure 
typically sets off the trap, alerts the victim, or 
jams the device so that it must be opened or 
interacted with in a different way. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



AMBIDENTROUS 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ 

Your warrior is as deft with his left hand as 

Below is a list of Edges common to most he is with his right. He ignores the Off-Hand 
settings. You'll find new Edges designed for penalty (see page 104). 
your game world in official Savage Worlds If holding a weapon in each hand, Ambi- 
books as well. dextrous characters may stack Parry bonuses 
The Edges are grouped by type to help (if any) from both weapons. 0 

fa of 
during character creation. You'll find a > 
summary on page 59. ARGANE BACKGROUND 
Unless an Edge specifically says otherwise, REQUIREMENTS: Novice 5 

n~N  
it may only be selected once. Exposure to strange energies, studies at 

m 
a magical school, or gifts from divine or 

REQUIREMENTS: Below each Edge is the x 
spiritual entities sometimes grant champions [7] 

minimum Rank (see page 54) required to 
their own powers and abilities. Such events 

take it along with any other prerequisites 
lead to the Arcane Background Edge and 

such as attributes, skills, or other Edges. 
the development of supernatural abilities. 
See Chapter Five for a complete description 

BACKGROUND EDGES of Arcane Backgrounds, powers, and how 

These Edges are typically advantages a to use them. 

character is born with, learns from 
prolonged and extensive training, or ARGANE RESISTANGE 
gains after exposure to certain events. REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d&+ 

Players can choose these Edges Magic and the supernatural hold little 
after character creation with a sway with this individual. Whether 
little rationalization. An individ- by nature, heritage, or training he’s 
ual might choose the Attractive particularly resistant to magic, 
Edge, for example, by clean- psionics, weird science, and other 

ing herself up, getting a supernatural energies. 
makeover, and generally Arcane skills targeting the hero 
paying more attention suffer a -2 penalty (even if cast by 
to her looks. Characters allies!) and magical damage is 
might be able to gain the reduced by 2 as well. 
Arcane Background Edge 
by finding a book of forbid- IMPROVED ARGANE 
den knowledge or training RESISTANGE 
with another arcane type in REQUIREMENTS: 
their party during down- Novice, Arcane 
time between adventures. Resistance 

As above, but the 
ALERTNESS penalty to the arcane skill roll 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice and damage are increased to 4. 
Not much gets by this 
hero. He's very observant ARISTOGRAT 
and perceptive, and adds REQUIREMENTS: Novice 
+2 to his Notice rolls to This individual was born 
hear, see, or otherwise sense into privilege or came into it 
the world around him. later in life. She may or may 

not have money (the Rich or 
Filthy Rich Edge), but she still 
walks in the elite social circles 
of the setting. 

== 



Aristocrats add +2 to Persuasion when After five consecutive rounds of berserk 
Networking (see page 133) with the local fury, the hero takes a level of Fatigue. At ten 
elite, captains of industry, nobles, or other rounds, she takes another level of Fatigue and 
aristocrats. They also add +2 to Common the rage ends. She may also choose to end her 
Knowledge rolls made to know the etiquette rage at any time by making a Smarts -2 roll 
of the upper class, recognize family trees or (as a free action; possibly avoiding Fatigue 
heraldry, or recall gossip concerning others if she manages to end her rage before it’s 
of their station. incurred!). Start the count anew if she goes 

berserk again, even in the same battle. 
ATTRAGTIVE 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d6+ BRAVE 
It’s no secret people are more willing to REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d6+ 

help those they find physically attractive. Those with this Edge have learned to master 
Your character adds +1 to Performance and their fear, or have dealt with so many horrors 
Persuasion rolls if the target is attracted to his they've become jaded. These valiant explorers 
general type (gender, sex, species, etc.). add +2 to Fear checks and subtract 2 from 

Fear Table results (see page 124). 
VERY ATTRACTIVE 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Attractive BRAWNY 
Your hero is drop-dead gorgeous. He REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d6+, 

increases his Performance and Persuasion Vigor d6+ 

bonus to +2. Your bruiser is very large or very fit. Her Size 
increases by +1 (and therefore Toughness 

BERSERK by 1) and she treats her Strength as one die 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice type higher when determining Encumbrance 
Berserkers become wild and nearly uncon- (page 67) and Minimum Strength to use 
trollable when the “red rage” takes them, but armor, weapons, and equipment without a 

they are deadly killing machines as well! penalty (page 66). 

Immediately after suffering a Wound or a Brawny can’t increase a character's Size 

Shaken result (from physical damage only), above +3. 
your hero must make a Smarts roll or go 
Berserk. She can voluntarily fail this check if BRUTE 
she likes. REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength dé+, 

Going Berserk has the following effects: Vigor d6+ 
Brutes focus on core strength and fitness 

= FURY: The character's Strength increases a 
over coordination and flexibility. They treat 

die type and every melee attack must be a 
Athletics as linked to Strength instead of 

Wild Attack (see page 109). She cannot use 
Agility for purposes of Advancement. The 

any skills that require wit or concentration 
character may also resist Athletics Tests with 

(GM's call). She may scream out threats and 
Strength if she chooses. 

use Intimidation, for example. 
Finally, Brutes increase the Short Range of 

= ENRAGED: Adrenaline and rage fuel 
any thrown item by +1. Double that for the 

the berserker’s muscles, adding +2 to 
adjusted Medium Range, and double again 

Toughness. She ignores one level of Wound 
for Long Range. If a thrown item's Range is 

penalties (this stacks with any other abilities 
3/6/12, for example, a Brute’s Range is 4/8/16. 

that reduce Wound penalties). 
= RECKLESS ABANDON: Anytime a berserker CHARISMATIC 
rolls a Critical Failure on a Fighting check, REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ 
she hits a random target within range of 

Your hero is likable for some reason. She may 
her attack (not the intended target), friend 

be trustworthy or kind, or might just exude 
or foe. If there are no applicable targets, 

confidence and goodwill. You get one free 
the blow simply misses, smashes nearby 

reroll on Persuasion rolls. 
objects, etc. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



FAMOUS 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fame 

Elan means energy or spirit. Those who Your hero is truly famous. She's well- 
have it rise to the occasion when the going known in a large circle such as a country, 
gets toughest. When you spend a Benny to a large industry, or a popular medium 
reroll a Trait, add +2 to the total. The bonus (film or television, the music industry). She 
applies only when rerolling. It doesn’t apply makes5 x the normal fee when performing 
to damage rolls (since theyre not Trait rolls), and adds +2 to Persuasion rolls when 
nor does it apply to Soak rolls unless you're influencing friendly individuawlhso know 
using another Benny to reroll the Vigor check. who she is. 

The price is higher for the truly Famous, 
FAME too, with more demands on her time, 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice obligations, rivals, scandals, and an 
Your character is a minor celebrity of some inability to operate in crowds without 
sort. She might be a popular bard known in being recognized. 
a particular fiefdom, a minor rock star, or a 
beloved B-movie actor. FAST HEALER 
She makes double the normal fee when REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+ 

performing for pay (see Performance, page Those with this blessing add +2 to Vigor rolls 
32). She can also use her celebrity to add +1 for natural healing, and check every three 
to Persuasion rolls if a target is friendly and days instead of five (see Healing, page 96). 
knows who she is (a Common Knowledge 
roll modified by how likely the individual is FLEET-FOOTED 
to know the celebrity). REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d6+ 

The downside of Fame is that the individual The hero's Pace is increased by +2 and his 
is often recognized, others frequently want running die increases one step (from dé to d8, 
something from her, she may be followed for example). 
by fans or admirers, or she may not be able 
to shirk obligations, performances, or other 
duties without causing trouble for herself. 



LINGUIST HITHY RIGH 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts dé+ REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Rich 

This world-traveler has an ear for languages. This fortunate individual is very wealthy. 
She begins play knowing half her Smarts die He has five times the starting funds for 
type in different Language skills of her choice the setting during character creation 
at d6 (see the Language skill on page 31). and, if appropriate, a yearly income after 

responsibilities of around $500,000. 
LIEK Even wealthier characters may exist, but 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice unless there's a game effect it probably 
The adventurer seems to be blessed by fate, shouldn’t matter. This should be worked 
karma, the gods, or whatever external forces out with the GM and come with many more 
he believes in (or believe in him!). assets as well as onerous responsibilities. 
He draws one extra Benny at the beginning 

of each game session, allowing him to succeed GOMBAT EDGES 
at important tasks more often than most, and 

These Edges are designed to help your hero 
survive incredible dangers. 

dish out terrible damage — or survive it — in 

GREAT LUCK the bloody battles of Savage Worlds. 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Luck BLOGK 
The player draws two extra Bennies instead REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fighting d8+ 
of one at the start of each session. 

Through hard-fought experience your hero 

auicK has learned to defend himself in vicious 
hand-to-hand combat. His Parry increases 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ by +1 and any Gang Up bonus against 
Quick characters have lightning-fast reflexes ~~ him is reduced by one. 
and a cool head. Whenever you are dealt an 
Action Card of Five or lower, you may IMPROVED BLOGK 
discard it and draw again until you REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, 
get a card higher than Five. Block 
Characters with both the Level The hero’s Parry bonus is 

Headed and Quick Edges first draw now +2 and the Gang Up 
their additional card and choose bonus against him is 
which to take. If that card is a reduced by 2. 
Five or less, the Quick Edge may 
be used to draw a replacement 
until it's Six or higher. 

RIGH 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice 

Whether the individual was 
born with a silver spoon 
in his mouth or earned it 
through hard work, he’s got 
more money than most. 

Rich heroes start with three 
times the normal starting 
funds for the setting. If a 
regular income is appropriate 
for this setting, the hero receives the 
modern-day equivalent of a $150,000 
annual salary. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



BRAWLER DEAD SHOT 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d8+, REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice, 
Vigor d8+ Athletics or Shooting d8+ 

His fists hit like hammers or his talons cut like When your Action Card is a Joker, double the 
scythes. His body feels like it's made of stone. total damage of your first successful Athletics 
Brawlers increase their Toughness by 1 and (throwing) or Shooting roll this round. 
roll Strength +d4 when hitting with their fists 
or feet (or claws if they have them). If they nonGE 
already have a damage die from Claws (page REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Agility d8+ 
18), the Martial Artist Edge, etc, increase The hero can anticipate attacks or move 
the damage die type by one instead. erratically under fire. Unless the victim 
The Brawler Edge doesn’t make the of a surprise attack and taken completely 

character's fists Natural Weapons (page 104). unaware, Dodge subtracts 2 from all ranged 
attacks made against the character. Dodge 

BRUISER does not stack with actual cover, however. 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Brawler 

The fighter increases his Toughness an IMPROVED DODGE 
additiona+1l, and the damage caused with REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Dodge 
his fists or claws another die type. The hero adds +2 when Evading area effect 

attacks. See Evasion on page 100. 
GALGULATING 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d8+ DOUBLE TAP 
A few seconds to study your foe's actions REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Shooting d6+ 

gives your hero a major advantage. When his Experienced firearms experts fire two shots in 
Action Card is a Five or less, he ignores up to rapid succession without spoiling their aim. 
2 points of penalties on one action that turn, Double Tap can only be used with weapons 
which can include Multi-Action, cover, Range, that have a Rate of Fire of 1 and can fire two 
and even Wound penalties. shots without needing to manually reload. It 

adds +1 to hit and damage at the cost of one 
GOMBAT REFLENES extra bullet. This is per action, so a shooter can 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned Double Tap more than once if she performs a 
Your warrior recovers quickly from shock Multi-Action. 
and trauma. He adds +2 to his rolls when Double Tap cannot be combined with 
attempting to recover from being Shaken Rapid Fire. 
or Stunned. 

If used with a weapon capable of Three- 

GOUNTERATTAGK Round Burst (see page 67), it adds +2 to 
Shooting and damage instead of +1 and 

REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fighting d8+ expends six bullets. 
Fighters with this Edge deal instant 
punishment for an enemy's mistakes. Once EXTRAGTION 
per turn (if not Shaken or Stunned), the REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ 
character receives a Free Attack (page 101) 

When a character withdraws from melee, 
against one failed Fighting attack against him. 

adjacent attackers get a free Fighting attack 
The counterattack takes place immediately 

against him (see Withdrawing from Melee 
(before other hits against the hero on the same 

on page 109). This is a very dangerous 
Action Card, if any). 

proposition for most, but not your wily 

IMPROVED COUNTERATTAGK champion. 

REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Counterattack When moving away from adjacent foes, one 
of them (player’s choice), doesn’t get his free 

As above but the hero gets a Free Attack 
Fighting attack. 

against up to three failed attacks each turn. 

SHILOVHVYHD 



IMPROVED EXTRACTION Example: Red desperately attacks a giant 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Extraction crab-like creature on an alien planet. She has 

[72] Improved Frenzy and decides to attack three 
[=] Up to three foes’ (player's choice) don’t get 
pu times (a Multi-Action at the usual penalty). 

attacks when your warrior moves out of 
[4 She rolls her Fighting skill with an extra die for 
(=) melee with them. 

her first attack and second attack. She doesn't 
= get the extra die on her third Fighting roll. 
[#] FEINT 

& | REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Fighting d8+ 
GIANT KILLER 

= When performing a Test (page 108) with the 
Fighting skill, you can choose to make the foe REQUIREMENTS: Veteran 

0 resist with Smarts instead of Agility. The bigger they are, the harder they are to kill. 
Atleast for most. Your hero knows how to find 

FIRST STRIKE the weak points in the most massive of foes. 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ He adds +1d6 damage when attacking 
Once per round, as long as he’s not Shaken or creatures who are three or more Sizes larger 
Stunned, the hero gets a free Fighting attack than himself (see Size, page 178). A human 
against a foe immediately after he moves into (Size 0) gets the bonus against a creature of 
Reach. (See Free Attacks on page 101). Size 3 or greater. 

IMPROVED HIRST STRIKE HARD TO KILL 
REQUIREMENTS: Heroic, First Strike REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ 

As above but the hero may attack up to This adventurer has more lives than a herd 

three foes each turn. of cats. He may ignore his Wound penalties 
when making Vigor rolls to avoid Bleeding 
Out (see page 95). 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+, 
Athletics d6+ HARDER TO KI 

REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Hard to Kill 
Your character practices “parkour” or isjust 
very skilled at running, jumping, swinging, Your hero is tougher to kill than Rasputin. 
scampering up walls, and over obstacles. If he is ever “killed,” roll a die. On an odd 

result, he’s dead as usual. On an even roll, 
As long as there are obstacles she can bound 

he’s Incapacitated but somehow escapes 
on, bounce off, or swing on, she moves at her 

death. He may be captured, stripped of all 
full Pace on Difficult Ground when on foot. 

his belongings, or mistakenly left for dead, 
She also adds +2 to her Athletics rolls when 

but he somehow survives. 
climbing and in foot Chases (see Chases & 
Vehicles page 113). IMPROVISATIONAL FIGHTER 
FRENZY REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d6+ 

REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fighting d8+ Heroes often find themselves fighting with 
pieces of equipment or furnishings not 

A character with Frenzy rolls a second 
designed for combat. A brawler with this 

Fighting die with any one of his Fighting 
Edge has a knack for using such improvised 

attacks for the turn. The extra die may be 
weapons. He ignores the usual -2 penalty 

allocated to the same or different targets as 
when wielding them. See page 102 for 

he sees fit. Resolve each separately. 
details on Improvised Weapons. 

IMPROVED FRENIY IRON JAW 
REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Frenzy 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+ 
The fighter rolls an extra Fighting die with 

The hero can shrug off even extreme blows. 
up to two Fighting attacks in the same turn. 

He adds +2 to Soak rolls and Vigor rolls to 
avoid Knockout Blows (see page 100). 



KILLER INSTINGY MIGHTY BLOW 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice, 

This hero hates losing. He gets a free reroll in Fighting d&+ 
any opposed Test he initiates. If your Action Card is a Joker, double the 

damage of your first successful Fighting 
LEVEL HEADED attack this round. 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d8+ 

Fighters who can keep their cool when every- NERVES OF STEEL 
one else is running for cover make deadly REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+ 
combatants. A hero with this Edge draws Your hero has learned to fight on through the 
an additional Action Card in combat and most intense pain. He may ignore 1 point of 
chooses which to use. Wound penalties. 

IMPROVED LEVEL HEADED IMPROVED NERVES OF STEEL 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Level Headed REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Nerves of Steel 

As above but the hero draws two additional The hero ignores two points of Wound 
cards and chooses which to keep. penalties. 

NO MERCY 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Athletics d8+ or REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned 
Shooting d+ When this killer spends a Benny to reroll 

The hero is a natural with ranged weapons. If damage, he adds +2 to his final total. 
she doesn’t move in a turn and fires no more 
than a Rate of Fire of 1 per action, she may RAPID HIRE 
ignore up to 2 points of Athletics (throwing) REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Shooting d6+ 
or Shooting penalties from Called Shots, The shooter is practiced at taking quick and 
Cover, Range, Scale, or Speed. This stacks accurate shots. As long as she’s armed with 
with the Aim maneuver and applies to each a fast-firing ranged weapon of some sort 
Shooting or throwing action that turn. (such as a revolver or semi-automatic) and 

has enough ammunition to do so, she may 
MARTIAL ARTIST increase her weapon's Rate of Fire by 1 for 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Fighting d6+ any one of her Shooting attacks that turn. 
The fighter has trained in basic martial arts. 
Her fists and feet are weapons (see Natural IMPROVED RAPID FIRE 
Weapons, page 104) so she’s always consid- REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Rapid Fire 
ered armed. She adds +1 when striking with The shooter may now increase her weapon's 
them and causes Strength+d4 damage. If she Rate of Fire by 1 twice in the same turn (via 
already has a Strength damage die from the a Multi-Action). 
Claws racial ability (page 18) or the Brawler 
Edge, increase the damage a die type. Example: Gabe fires a machine gun and has 

Improved Rapid Fire. The weapon has a Rate 
Martial Artist does not add to damage from 

of Fire of4 and Gabe decides to fire it on all 
other Natural Weapons such as fangs or horns. 

three of his allowed actions (see Multi-Actions 

MARTIAL WARRIOR on page 103). 
He rolls an extra Shooting die with his first 

REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Martial Artist and second attack, raising the weapon's Rate 
Increase the warrior’s Fighting bonus to +2 of Fire to 5 each time. He doesn’t get the bonus 
and her damage die an additional step. on his third atta—cthke machine gun’s Rate of 

Fire remains a 4. 

SHILOVHVHD 



ROCK AND ROLL IMPROVED TRADEMARK WEAPON 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Shooting d8+ REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Trademark 

Experienced shooters learn to compensate Weapon 
for the recoil of fully automatic weapons. If As above but the bonuses when using the 
a character with this Edge doesn’t move on weapon increase to +2. 
his turn, he ignores the Recoil penalty when 
firing at a Rate of Fire of 2 or higher. (See TWO-FISTED 
Recoil, page 105.) REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ 

If a character makes a Fighting attack with 
STEADY HANDS one action and another from a different hand 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ in a later action, the second attack doesn’t 
Firing from the back of a horse or moving inflict a Multi-Action penalty. The Off-Hand 
vehicle is tricky business, but your adventurer penalty still applies unless he’s Ambidextrous, 
has figured it out. She ignores the Unstable however (page 104). 
Platform penalty (see page 109). If the character has Two-Gun Kid, the 
This also helps when running, reducing the second action may also be a ranged attack. 

usual penalty from -2 to -1 (see Movement, 
page 92). TWO-GUN KID 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ 
SWEEP Two-Gun Kid works just like Two-Fisted, 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d8+, but with ranged weapons, allowing her to 
Fighting d8+ fire or throw a weapon in each hand as two 

Sweep allows a character to make a single different actions but without triggering a 
Fighting attack and apply it against all targets Multi-Action penalty. 
in his Reach at a -2 penalty (friends and foes If the character has Two-Fisted, the second 
alike). Resolve damage separately for each action may also be a melee attack. 
enemy that's hit. 

Example: Red has a sword in one hand and a 
A fighter may only perform a Sweep once 

pistol in the other. She has both Two-Fisted and 
per turn. It may not be combined with Frenzy. 

Two-Gun Kid, so she can make a Fighting attack 

IMPROVED SWEEP on one action and then a second Fighting or 
Shooting attack with no Multi-Action penalty 

REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Sweep 
on a later action that turn. 

As above but the whirlwind of death may 
ignore the -2 penalty. 

LEADERSHIP ENGES 
TRADEMARK WEAPON Leadership Edges grant bonuses to allies, 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, skill with chosen making them more effective, reliable, 
weapon of d8+ or durable. 

The hero knows one unique weapon Unless an Edge says otherwise, it only 
(Excalibur, Old Betsy, Sting) like the back of affects allied Extras. Wild Cards only benefit 
his hand. When using it, he adds +1 to his if the leader has the Natural Leader Edge. 
Athletics (throwing), Fighting, or Shooting 

Leadership Edges aren’t cumulative with 
rolls, and +1 to Parry when readied (even if 

the same Edge from other leaders. Characters 
it's a ranged weapon). 

may benefit from different Leadership Edges 
A fighter can take this Edge multiple times, by the same or different leaders, however. 

applying it to a different weapon each time. 
Command Range: Allies must be within 5” 

If a Trademark Weapons lost, he can replace 
(10 yards) to benefit from her abilities. This is 

it but the benefits don’t kick in for a few days 
called her “Command Range.” 

(however long the GM feels is dramatically 
appropriate). 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



COMMAND NATURAL LEADER 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+ REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Spirit d8+, 

Command is the basic ability to give clear Command 
instructions and support to allies in the thick This leader has proven herself time and time 
of battle. Extras in Command Range add +1 to again, gaining the respect of all those who 
their Spirit rolls when attempting to recover fight by her side. 
from being Shaken. Any Leadership Edge that says it applies 

only to Extras now applies to Wild Cards as 
COMMAND PRESENCE well. 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Command 

A booming voice, effective commands, TAGTIGIAN 
natural charisma, or simple training results REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d8+, 
in a much more effective combat element. A Command, Battle dé6+ 
hero with this Edge has a Command Range The commander has a natural grasp of small 
of 10" (20 yards). unit tactics and can take advantage of rapidly 

changing situations. 
A Tactician is dealt an extra Action Card 

REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Spirit d8+, 
each round of combat or a chase — kept 

Command separate from his own cards. At the start 
A simple phrase uttered by a great leader of the round, he may discard it or give it to 
can sometimes have momentous results. A any one allied Extra in Command Range. 
commander with this ability can inspire his The player or GM controlling the receiving 
troops to bloody fervor by yelling a motto, character can decide whether to accept and 
slogan, or other inspirational words. replace her current Action Card, or discard it. 
Extras in range add +1 to their Fighting 

damage rolls. MASTER TAGTIGIAN 
REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Tactician 

The Tactician now gets a total of two extra 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d8+, Action Cards to distribute each round. 
Command 

Hold the Line strengthens the will of any 
Extras under the hero's command, adding +1 
to their Toughness. Power Edges are the key to unlocking the true 

potential of those with Arcane Backgrounds 
INSPIRE (explained in Chapter Five). They can mean 

REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Command the difference between an apprentice with a 
few abilities and a master of magic, miracles, 

Exceptional leaders inspire those around 
psionics, or weird science! 

them to great feats of valor and determination. 
Once per turn, the hero may roll his Battle ARTIFIGER 
skill to Support one type of Trait roll, and 
apply it to all allied Extras in Command REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane 

Range. A leader could Support all Shooting Background (Any, Weird Scientists have it 

attacks in range, for example, or all Spirit rolls automatically) 

to recover from being Shaken. Those who tangle with supernatural forces 
sometimes find ways to imbue powers into 

Inspire is an action and requires some sort 
items. They may turn an ordinary blade into 

of communication with those it affects. 
amagicsword, brew a potion that can heal an 
ally’s Wounds, or even bless a holy relic with 

“(ONE OF M4 FAVOTZITES ud divine grace. 

_GABE Artificers can create wondrous items and 
devices using the Arcane Devices system 
found on page 152. 

SHILOVHVHD 



This takes one entire turn, during which 

REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane she can do nothing else but make a Weird 

Background (Any) Science roll at 2 (she cannot take Multi- 
Actions that turn). 

When the character gets a raise on her arcane 
skill roll (or roll to activate or use an arcane The inventor uses Power Points directly 
device), she reduces its Power Point cost by 1. from her pool for the device, but once its initial 

This can take it to 0. Duration is finished (it cannot be maintained) 
it falls apart into its component pieces. 

Example: Gabe is an inventor in the Weird 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane West. He wants to use boost Trait to help Red 
Background (Any) fight a giant rattlesnake, but only has the burst 

The caster has learned to concentrate and blast powers. Fortunately, he’s a Gadgeteer, 
through mild injury or setbacks. He doesn’t so Gabe can put boost Trait into an “electrical 
have to make a Smarts roll to keep his bio-inducer.” The device can take up to three 
powers active when Shaken. He checks points worth ofp owers, so Gabe adds the Hurry 
only when he’s Stunned or Wounded (see modifier and gives Red +2 Pace as well. 
Disruption, page 150). 

HOLY/UNHOLY WARRIOR 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane 

REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Faith d6+ 
Background (Gifted), Focus dé6+ Believers face grave dangers in 

Some Gifted can dig deep service to their divine patrons. To 
into their souls to signifi- survive such hardships, the forces 
cantly boost their powers. of good (or evil) grant miracles 
Extra Effort increases and the ability to turn their favor 

a Focus total after it’s into supernatural protection. 
rolled by +1 for1 Power The chosen 
Point, or +2 for 3 Power may add +1 to 
Points. It may not the total of a 
be used to improve a final Soak roll 
Critical Failure. for each Power 

Point spent, to a 
GADGETEER maximum of +4. 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane 
Background (Weird Science), Weird MENTALIST 
Science d6+ REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, 

Some mechanical gurus can Arcane Background 
build incredible devices out of (Psionics), Psionics d6+ 
most anything. Constant contact with 
A Gadgeteer can spend up to three multiple minds gives 

Power Points to “jury rig” a device these psionic agents 
from most any reasonable collection an edge when it comes 
of spare parts. This allows her to to forcing or resisting 
use any power normally available to mental assaults. 
Weird Scientists of her Rank or lower Mentalists add +2 to 
in her particular setting, with a Power opposed Psionics rolls, 
Point cost of 3 or lower. whether they are using 
The total cost of the power (plus any their powers against a foe or 

modifiers) cannot exceed the points defending against a rival. 
spent to create it, but she may create 
multiple devices as long as she has the 
points to do so. 

46 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



NEW POWERS Fatigue incurred by Soul Drain comes 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Arcane from deep within and may only be recovered 

Background (Any) naturally. The relief power and similar 
abilities have no effect. 

An arcane character may learn two new 
powers by choosing this Edge (which may be WIZARD 
taken multiple times). He may choose from 
any powers of his Rank or lower normally REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane 

available to his particular Arcane Background. Background (Magic), Spellcasting dé+ 
Magic is varied and wonderful, and wizards 

POWER POINTS are exposed to countless tomes, scrolls, 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Arcane and incantations as they master their craft. 

Background (Any) Sometimes they use this knowledge to recall 
variations of their various enchantments. 

Wizards, weird scientists, and other arcane 
types always want more power. This Edge A Wizard can spend 1 extra Power 
grants them an additional 5 Power Points. Point when casting a power to change its 

Trapping. A fireball (blast) might manifest 
Power Points may be selected more than 

as a lightning bolt, for example. This can 
once, but only once per Rank. It may be taken 

often have important consequences if a foe 
as often as desired at Legendary Rank, but 

has a particular resistance or weakness to the 
each grants only 2 additional points. 

spell’s usual Trapping. 

POWER SURGE 
REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice, Arcane PROFESSIONAL ENGES 
Background (Any), arcane skill d8+ Professional Edges reflect years of practice or 

The character recovers 10 Power Points when experience in a particular trade, activity, or 
his Action Card is a Joker. This may not craft. In some cases they may also represent 
exceed his usual limit. special blessings from higher powers as well. 

Players may purchase Professional Edges 
RAPID REGHARGE after character creation, perhaps roleplaying 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Spirit d6+, the achievement by practicing the affected 
Arcane Background (Any) trade during downtime or in between 

Power Points normally recharge at a rate adventures. 
of 5 points every hour spent resting (see Stacking: Bonuses to the same Trait from 
Recharging, page 150). This Edge increases different Professional Edges do not stack. 
that rate to 10 every hour. Apply only the highest. 

IMPROVED RAPID REGHARGE AGE 
REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Rapid Recharge REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+ 
The character now regains 20 Power Points Aces are pilots and drivers who have a special 
per hour spent resting. affinity with their car, boat, plane, or other 

vehicle. They ignore two points of penalties 
SOUL DRAIN to any Boating, Driving, or Piloting roll, and 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Arcane may spend Bennies to Soak damage for any 
Background (Any), arcane skill d10+ vehicle they control or command, using the 

Desperate times call for desperate measures. appropriate Boating, Driving, or Piloting 
Soul Drain allows an arcane character to skill instead of Vigor. Each success and raise 
channel her physical energy into power, negates a Wound. 
taking a level of Fatigue to recover up to five 
Power Points. She can take an additional level 
of Fatigue (to Exhaustion) to recover up to 
five more Power Points. She cannot render 
herself Incapacitated in this way. 

SHILOVHVYHD 



AGROBAT INVESTIGATOR 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+, REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d8+, 

72] 
a Athletics d8+ Research d8+ 
i The Acrobat gets one free reroll on Athletics Investigators spend a great deal of time 
[2 
Oo totals that involve balance, tumbling, or researching ancient legends, working the 

= grappling. It doesn’t affect rolls to interrupt streets, or deducing devilish mysteries. 
[43] actions, climb, swim, or throw. Some of these heroes are actual private 

2 investigators while others are sleuthing 

S  GOMBAT ACROBAT mages in a fantasy world or inquisitive 
= REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Acrobat college professors stumbling upon Things 
U's] The tumbler leaps quickly about so that Man Was Not Meant to Know. 

attacks against her are made at -1 as Investigators add +2 to Research rolls and 
long as she’s aware of the attack, can Notice rolls made to search through desks for 
reasonably move about, and isn’t suffering important papers, sift through stacks of junk 
any Encumbrance or Minimum Strength mail for something of note, or spy obscured 
penalties. items from piles of junk or debris. 

ASSASSIN JAGK-OF-ALL- TRADES 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+, REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d10+ 
Fighting d6+, Stealth d8+ Through advanced schooling, book-learning, 

Assassins are trained killers who know how computer-enhanced skill programs, or just 
to kill even the toughest foes. They add +2 to amazing intuitive perception, your hero has a 
damage rolls when their foe is Vulnerable or talent for picking up skills on the fly. There's 
they have The Drop. little he can’t figure out given a little time and 

a dash of luck. 



The character makes a Smarts roll after an SCHOLAR 
hour of study or immersion on a particular REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Research d8+ 
skill. With success, she gains a d4 in the skill, 

Learned professors, devoted students, and 
or d6 with a raise. She may spend another 

amateur enthusiasts spend great amounts 
hour studying to try again if she fails or wants 

of time and energy studying particular 
to try for a raise. 

subjects. They become experts in these fields, 
This lasts until the character studies a and rarely fail to answer questions in their 

different subject. The Edge may not be used particular area of expertise. 
to increase a skill she actually has points in. 

Pick any one of the following skills: 

MEGGYVER Academics, Battle, Occult, Science, or a 
Smarts-based “knowledge”-type skill 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+, allowed in your setting, and add +2 to the 
Notice d8+, Repair d6+ total whenever they're used. 

A McGyver can improvise a device from 
This Edge may be taken more than once if 

common resources when the need arises. 
applied to different skills. 

Given a few simple items, he can make a 
Repair roll to craft improvised weapons, 
explosives, or tools, that last until used or the 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d6+, 
end of the encounter (GM's call). This takes 

Vigor d6+ 
one entire turn, and he can’t move or take any 
other actions while constructing the device. Professional soldiers get used to carrying 

heavy loads, and enduring harsh conditions. 
Failure means the device isn’t ready. A 

After a few days getting used to their gear 
Critical Failure means he doesn’t have the 

(GM's call), they treat their Strength as one die 
right materials and can’t create the device 

type higher when determining Encumbrance 
this encounter. 

(page 67) and Minimum Strength to use 
Success creates a minor explosive (2d4 armor, weapons, and equipment without 

explosive in a Small Blast Template), a one a penalty (page 66). (This stacks with the 
shot projectile weapon like a “zip gun’ ’ Brawny Edge.) 
(Range 5/10/20, Damage 2d6), rickety raft, 

They also get a free reroll on Vigor rolls 
electrical source, etc. 

made to survive environmental hazards (see 
A raise creates a larger explosive (2d6 in a Hazards, page 125). 

Medium Blast Template or 2d4 in a Large), a 
better ranged weapon (five shots, 2d8 damage, THIEF 
Range 10/20/40), a more stable raft, a more REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+, 
powerful battery, etc. Stealth d6+, Thievery d6+ 
The quality or power of the creation is Thieves specialize in deceit, treachery, and 

completely up to the Game Master, but acrobatics. They can be invaluable where 
creativity should be rewarded, particularly traps must be detected, walls must be climbed, 
in the most dire and dramatic situations. and locks must be picked. 

MR. HX IT Thieves know how to use protrusions on 
walls and window ledges to climb the tallest 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Repair d8+ of buildings, scampering through streets and 
The mechanic adds +2 to Repair rolls. With a back alleys like cats. They add +1 to Athletics 
raise, he halves the time normally required rolls made to climb in urban areas. 
to fix something. This means if a particular 

Thieves also know how to use the dark 
Repair job says a raise repairs it in half the 

areas between the streetlights of cities to 
time, a Mr. Fix It can finish the job in one- 

conceal their movements, and add +1 to 
quarter the time with a raise. 

Stealth rolls when in an urban environment. 

Finally, these roguesare — not surprisingly — 
adept at Thievery itself, adding +1 to those 
rolls in all circumstances. 

SHILOVHVHD 



WODDSMAN The favor depends on the nature of the 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d6+, contact (GM's call), but might include a loan, 
[72] 
a Survival d8+ gear, a few allied fighters, transportation, 

1 information, or even a professional with 
Woodsmen are rangers, scouts, and hunters 

[4 critical skills the party doesn’t have, like a 
(=) who are more at home in the wilderness than 

hacker or scholar. 
S in urban areas. They are skilled trackers and 
[#) scouts, and know how to live off the land for HUMILIATE 
& months at a time. 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Taunt d8+ 

= Woodsmen add +2 to Survival rolls, and 
Those with a cruel wit can destroy a rival's 

Stealth rolls made in the wild (not towns, 
0 ego in a single remark or well-timed gesture. 

ruins, or underground). 
Your hero gets a free reroll on Taunt Tests. 

SOGIAL EDGES MENAGING 
Getting people to do what you want is a REQUIREMENTS: Novice, any one of 

critical skill in most any setting. Bloodthirsty, Mean, Ruthless, or Ugly 
Being a brutish lout isn’t always a drawback | 

BOLSTER if you know how to use it. Menacing allows 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ a character to put her bad looks or worse 
Belittling or humiliating an enemy can also attitude to good use. The goon adds +2 to her 
boost your ally’s spirits. When this character Intimidation rolls. 
successfully Tests a foe, he may also remove 
the Distracted or Vulnerable state (page PROVOKE 
100) from one of his allies. REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Taunt d6+ 

Clever characters can manipulate their foes, 
GOMMON BOND drawing enemy focus on themselves to 
REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice, protect their allies. Once per turn, when your 

Spirit d8+ hero uses Taunt for a Test and gets a raise (see 
Selfless heroes and determined leaders know Test, page 108), she may Provoke the foe. 
their greatest strength often comes from In addition to all the usual effects of the 
their companions, and are willing to give success and raise, the enemy suffers a —2 
some of their own fortune, fate, or luck to penalty to affect any other target besides 
support them. the one who provoked her. This stacks 
A character with this Edge may freely give with Distracted but not further instances 

her Bennies to any other character she can of Provoke. 

communicate with. The player should explain Provoke lasts until a Joker is drawn, 
what form this takes, from a quick shout of someone else Provokes the target, or the 
encouragement to a welcome pat on the back. encounter ends. Provoke can affect multiple 

targets, and may be combined with Rabble 
CONNECTIONS Rouser (see below). 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice 

Your heroine is connected to people or RABBLE-ROUSER 
organizations who can help her when the REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Spirit d8+ 
chips are down. It might be the mob, the Feds, This instigator knows how to rile up several 
a union, or even other adventurers. enemies at once. 

Connections may be taken more than once, Once per turn, a character with this Edge 
selecting a new faction or contact each time. can make a social Test with Intimidation or 
Once per session, and assuming she can getin Taunt against all enemies in a Medium Blast 
touch with them, the heroine can call on her Template. The targets must be able to see and 
friends for a favor. hear the hero clearly. Each defender resists 

and is affected by the Test separately.



RELIABLE WORK THE ROOM 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ 

People know they can depend on your hero Your hero's words don’t just inspire those 
when they need assistance. He gets a free they're directed at — they often inspire others 
reroll on any Support roll. as well. Once per turn, you can use Work the 

Room to roll an additional skill die when 
RETORY Supporting with Persuasion or Performance. 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Taunt d6+ The additional die Supports any other ally 0 

who can see or hear your hero, and applies fa of 
This verbal duelist can turn the slings and > 
arrows of social combat right back at the to their next action, whatever it may be. =o 
unwitting fools who hurled them. = 

WORK THE GROWD nN 
~ 

If a character with Retort gets a raise when 
REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Work the m 

resisting an Intimidation or Taunt Test, the =x 
foe is Distracted. Room wn 

As Work the Room but the hero now can 

STREETWISE Support another on up to two of her Sup- 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+ port actions. 

Streetwise characters know how to find the 
local black market, fence stolen goods, avoid 
the local law (or criminal element!), lay Weird Edges are slightly supernatural in 
low when the heat’s on, obtain illegal origin and so are usually only appropriate 
weapons, find out which “boss” is in games with those elements. Check 
hiring muscle, or similar shady with your GM before 
activities. taking them. 

Streetwise charactersad+d2 § 2 
to Intimidation or Persuasion uF - BEAST BOND 
rolls made to Network (see REQUIREMENTS: Novice 
page 133) with shady or Some individuals have an 
criminal elements. They also extraordinary bond with their 
add +2 to Common Knowledge animal companions. These 
rolls pertaining to the types of characters may spend their 
disreputable activities listed above. own Bennies for any animals 

under their control, including 
STRONG WILLED mounts, pets, familiars, 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ and so on. 
Self-confidence is strong armor 
against those who would belittle BEAST MASTER 
this individual. He adds +2 to his REQUIREMENTS: Novice, 
total when resisting any opposed Spirit d8+ 
Smarts or Spirit-based rolls, Animals take to your hero 
including Tests and arcane skills. quickly and easily. They won't 

attack him unless he attacks 
IRON WiLL them first or they're enraged 
REQUIREMENTS: Novice, for some reason. 
Strong Willed The Beast Master's “animal 

Few things phase this magnetism” is so great he’s 
character's powerful attracted a loyal animal of some 
psyche. The bonus sort as well. This is typically 
increases to +4. an animal of Size 0 or smaller, 

subject to the GM's approval. 



The beast is an Extra and doesn’t Advance in DANGER SENSE 
Rank or abilities. If a pet is dismissed or killed, REQUIREMENTS: Novice 
the hero gains a replacement in 1d4 days. 

Your hero can sense when something bad is 
More Powerful Companions: Beast Master about to happen. When rolling for Surprise 

may be taken more than once. Choose one of (page 108), he adds +2 to his Notice roll to act 
the effects below each time it’s chosen: in the first round. With a raise, he starts the 
* Gain an additional pet. encounter on Hold. 
* Increase one of the pet's Traits one die type In other situations not covered by the 
(only one Trait per pet). Surprise rules (a sniper shot, pit trap, 

* Increase the maximum Size pet you may poisoned drink, etc.), Danger Sense gives 
have by +1, to a maximum of 3. him a Notice roll at -2 (or +2 if a Notice roll 

* Make one pet a Wild Card. (The hero must is usually allowed) to detect the hazard and 
be of Heroic Rank). take appropriate action. If this was an attack 

and the hero makes his Notice roll, the foe 
doesn’t get The Drop against him. 

REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+, 
Fighting d6+ 

Champions are holy (or unholy) men and REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+ 
women chosen to fight for a particular deity A hero with this Edge adds +2 to all Healing 
or religion. Most are pious souls ready and rolls, whether natural or magical in nature. 
willing to lay down their lives for a greater 
cause, but some may have been born into LIQUID GOURAGE 
the role and follow their path with some REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d&+ 
reluctance. 

This gregarious individual processes alcohol 
Champions fight the forces of darkness (or far differently than most. The round after 

good), adding +2 damage when attacking consuming a stiff drink (about eight ounces 
supernaturally evil (or good if they're evil) of hard liquor or equivalent), her Vigor 
creatures. The bonus applies to area effect increases one die type (increasing Toughness 
damage, ranged attacks, powers, etc. as well). The drinker can also ignore one level 
The GM must decide which foes this bonus of Wound penalties (which stacks with other 

applies to, but generally it's any evil (or abilities that do the same). 
good!) creature born of magic or with any Smarts, Agility, and all linked skills suffer a 
supernatural abilities. -1 penalty for the duration, however. 

CHI The effect lasts for one hour after it begins, 
at which point the boozer suffers a level of 

REQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Martial Warrior Fatigue for the next four hours. 
Your hero’s martial arts training goes beyond 
the norm and into the realm of the mystical. SCAVENGER 
At the start of each combat encounter, she REQUIREMENTS: Novice, Luck 
gains a “Chi Point” that can be spent to: 

Once per encounter the hero may find, 
* Reroll one of her failed attacks (even a “suddenly remember,” or dig up some much- 
Critical Failure). needed piece of equipment, a handful of 

* Make an enemy discard an attack against ammunition, or some other useful device. 
her, then reroll it from scratch. 

The Game Master decides what constitutes 
* Add +d6 damage to a successful Fighting 

an encounter, and has the final word on what 
attack made with her hands, feet, claws, or 

can and can’t be found. 
other Natural Weapons (this may Ace). 
Unspent Chi is lost at the end of the combat 

encounter. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



LEGENDARY EDGES SIDEKICK 
REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Legendary 

Most Legendary Edges are very specific to A character who triumphs over evil time and 
their campaign world — such as gaining a time again becomes an inspiration to others. 
stronghold or divine favor —but a few fit Eventually, one of these young crusaders may 
most anywhere. Here are a few that should attempt to join the hero in his epic quests. 
fit most every setting or genre, from the 

The hero gains a Novice Rank sidekick. The 
dungeons of swords & sorcery worlds to the 

sidekick is a Wild Card, starts each session 
far-flung worlds of futuristic space operas. 

with two Bennies, may Advance, and has 

FOLLOWERS abilities that complement his mentor. The 
player character controls his sidekick just like 

REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Legendary any other ally, though he may occasionally 
Each time this Edge is chosen, five followers cause trouble by getting captured, running 
come to fight by the hero's side. If any are lost, into danger when he’s not supposed to, and 
others eventually take their place (how long so on. The player should be prepared for his 
is up to the GM and the circumstances). Edge to occasionally become a Hindrance! 
Followers must be cared for and generally If the sidekick dies, he isn’t replaced unless 

want a share of whatever loot, treasure, or the hero chooses this Edge again. Fortunately, 
other rewards the hero acquires. Otherwise, heroes may always spend Bennies for their 
they are completely dedicated to their task. sidekicks as if she had the Common Bond 
They won't throw their lives away but are Edge. Sidekicks must actually take that Edge 
willing to risk them repeatedly in his service. to do the same for their mentors. 
Use the Soldier profile found on page 188 

for the followers. A hero may outfit her allies TOUGH AS NAILS 
as she sees fit. Followers Advance just like REQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Vigor d8+ 
player characters (see page 54). Your character keeps going when others 
Use the Allies rules on page 111 to give fall. She can take four Wounds before she’s 

them distinctive personalities if desired. Incapacitated (her maximum Wound penalty 
is still -3). 

REQUIREMENTS: Legendary, maximum die TOUGHER THAN NAILS 
type possible in affected Trait REQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Tough as 

The character is an expert at a particular skill Nails, Vigor d12+ 
or attribute (his choice). This increases the The hero can take up to five Wounds before 
Trait and its limit one step (a d12 + 1 becomes she’s Incapacitated! Her maximum Wound 
a d12+2, for example). This Edge may be penalty is still -3. 
selected once per Trait. 

WEAPON MASTER 
EXPERT REQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Fighting d12+ 
REQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Professional The warrior increases his Parry by +1 and the 

in affected Trait bonus damage die for Fighting rolls is a d8 
As the Professional Edge, increasing the instead of a d6 (see Bonus Damage, page 94). 
Trait and its limit one additional step. He must be armed to gain these benefits, but 

this includes the Martial Artist Edge, claws, or 
MASTER other abilities that count as weapons. 
REQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Legendary, 
Expert in affected Trait MASTER OF ARMS 

The character's Wild Die increases to a d10 REQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Weapon 
when rolling the selected Expert Trait. Master 

Increase the hero’s Parry an additional 
+1 and his Fighting bonus damage die is 
now a d10. 

SHILOVHVHD 



ADVANGEMENT RANK 
As a character gains Advances, she goes up 
in “Rank.” This is a rough measure of how 

One of the many great aspects of roleplaying 
powerful she is. Each Rank allows access to 

games is advancing your character, watching 
more powerful Edges and certain abilities 

her grow from a Novice to a Legendary hero. 
(such as powers)! 

Advancement in Savage Worlds depends 
on the length of your intended campaign. RANK 
For short campaigns of 10 sessions or fewer, 

ADVANCES RANK 
we recommend characters Advance after 
each session. In a One Shot, you might even 0-3 Novice 

want to allow an Advance in the middle of 4-7 Seasoned 

the adventure, especially if there's some 8-11 Veteran 
downtime or a narrative opportunity that 

12-15 Heroic 
makes sense. 

le+ Legendary 
You can slow things down for longer 

campaigns by granting an Advance every 
other session, or even every third session STARTING WITH EXPERIENGED CHARACTERS 
if you intend on playing for years. You can If the GM wants to start a game with more 
even decide to grant Advances after certain experienced characters, you should still make 
objectives are met— it’s completely in the a Novice and Advance it normally. This 
hands of the Game Master. ensures characters are balanced just as if they 

had gained experience normally. 
An Advance lets a character do one of the 

following. Remember that no Trait may be Additional goods, equipment, or other 
raised above its racial maximum (usually d12). assets must be determined by the Game 

* Gain a new Edge. Master and the particular setting. As a quick 

* Increase a skill that is equal to or greater rule of thumb, a character's starting funds 

than its linked attribute one die type. double with each Rank after Novice. 

* Increase two skills that are lower than Replacement Characters: When a character 
their linked attributes by one die type each dies, we recommend the player create a new 
(including new skills the character didn't Novice hero then give him the same number 
have before at d4). of Advances his previous champion had 

* Increase one attribute by a die type. This when he fell. 
option may only be taken once per Rank 
(see Rank, below). Legendary characters ALLIES & ANVANGEMENT 
may raise an attribute every other Advance, Followers and other allies who stay with the 
up to the racial maximum. party for extended periods can improve their 

* Permanently remove a Minor Hindrance, abilities as well. 
or reduce a Major Hindrance to a Minor (if At the end of a game session in which 
possible). With the GM's permission, and if the allies had a significant role (usually 
it makes sense, two Advances may be saved by participating in combat, but GM's call), 
up and spent to remove a Major Hindrance. Advance them just as you would the player 
The player and GM should work out characters. 
how and when this happens. Perhaps the 
shocking death of an ally triggers a change 
in attitude, the hero puts real effort into lig ALWAYS A GOOD DEA TO 

improving harmful behavior, or might even NCTZEASAEN ATTZIBUTE. 
seek professional help during downtime I opens ue NEW EO4ES 
between missions. AND MAKES (75 LINKED 

KILLS CHEAPETZT-O But” 
_ LAE 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



GHARAGTER GREATION SUMMARY 

GONGEPT 
e Start with a general idea of what you want to play. Your setting book likely provides many 

ideas. 

\ 
® Choose your character's race (see page 12) and apply any bonuses or special abilities it 
grants. 

* Select up to four points of Hindrances (Major Hindrances are worth 2, Minor are worth 1). 
* For 2 Hindrance points you can raise an attribute one die type, or choose an Edge. 
* For 1 Hindrance point you can gain another skill point, or gain additional starting funds 
equal to twice your setting’s starting amount. 

ATTRIBUTES 
* Attributes start at d4. You have 5 points to distribute among them. Each step costs 1 point. 
e Attributes may not be raised beyond d12 unless your hero’s racial bonus states otherwise. 

SKILLS 
e Athletics, Common Knowledge, Notice, Persuasion, and Stealth are core skills and start at 
d4 for free. 

* You have 12 points to put into these or any other skills. 
* Each die type costs 1 point-up to.and equal to the linked attribute; then-2-points per step 

after that. 

DERIVED STATISTICS 
* Standard Pace is 6”, but may be changed by racial abilities, Edges, or Hindrances. 
* Parry is 2 plus half of Fighting. 
* Toughness is 2 plus half of Vigor, plus any Armor. 
Note the amount of armor in parentheses like this — Toughness: 11 (2). This means 2 points 
of the total 11 Toughness comes from Armor. An Armor Piercing attack could bypass those 
2 points but not the other 9. 

EDGES 
Use any leftover Hindrance points to take Edges if you like. 

* Each Edge costs 2 Hindrance points. 

* Purchase up to $500 worth of equipment.



=a Eta  Ee - — i —— re mm re mre mm 

HINDRANGE SUMMARIES 
All Thumbs (Minor): -2 to use mechanical or electrical devices. : Tak 
Anemic (Minor): -2 Vigor when resisting Fatigue. 

Arrogant (Major): Likes to dominate his opponent, challenge the most powerful foe in combat. 
Bad Eyes (Minor/Major): —1 to all Trait rolls dependent on vision, or -2 as a Major Hindrance. 
Eyewear negates penalty but have a 50% chance of breaking when the hero suffers trauma. 

Bad Luck (Major): The characters starts with one less Benny per session. 

Big Mouth (Minor): Unable to keep secrets and constantly gives away private information. 
Blind (Major): —6 to all tasks that require vision (but choice of a free Edge to offset). 

Bloodthirsty (Major): Never takes prisoners. 

Can’t Swim (Minor): -2 to swimming (Athletics) rolls; swimming Pace is one yard per round. 
Cautious (Minor): The character plans extensively and/or is overly careful. 

Clueless (Major): 2 to Common Knowledge and Notice rolls. 

Clumsy (Major): -2 to Athletics and Stealth rolls. 

Code of Honor (Major): The character keeps his word and acts like a gentleman. 
Curious (Major): The character wants to know about everything. 

Death Wish (Minor): The hero wants to die after or while completing some epic task. 

Delusional (Minor/Major): The individual believes something strange that causes him occasional 
or frequent trouble. 
Doubting Thomas (Minor): The character doesn’t believe in the supernatural, often exposing him to 
unnecessary risks. 

Driven (Minor/Major): The hero's actions are driven by some important goal or belief. 

Elderly (Major): -1 to Pace, running, Agility, Strength, and Vigor. Hero gets 5 extra skill points. 
Enemy (Minor/Major): The character has a recurring nemesis. 

Greedy (Minor/Major): The individual is obsessed with wealth and material possessions. 

Habit (Minor/Major): Addicted to something, suffers Fatigue if deprived. 

Hard of Hearing (Minor/Major): 4 to Notice sounds; automatic failure if completely deaf. 

Heroic (Major): The character always helps those in need. 

Hesitant (Minor): Draw two Action Cards and take the lowest (except Jokers, which may be kept). 
Illiterate (Minor): The character cannot read or write. 

Impulsive (Major): The hero leaps before he looks. 

Jealous (Minor/Major): The individual covets what others have. 

Loyal (Minor): The hero is loyal to his friends and allies. 3 

Mean (Minor): -1 to Persuasion rolls. 

Mild Mannered (Minor): -2 to Intimidation rolls. 
Mute (Major): The hero cannot speak. 

Obese (Minor): Size +1, Pace -1 and running die of d4. Treat Str as one die type lower for Min Str. 
Obligation (Minor/Major): The character has a weekly obligation of 20 (Minor) to 40 (Major) hours. 

One Arm (Major): —4 to tasks (such as Athletics) that require two hands. 

One Eye (Major): -2 to actions at 5" (10 yards) or more distance. 

Outsider (Minor/Major): The character doesn’t fit in to the local environment and subtracts 2 from" 
‘Persuasion rolls. As a Major Hindrance she has no legal rights or other serious consequences. 
Overconfident (Major): The hero believes she can do anything. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



Pacifist (Minor/Major): Fights only in self-defense as a Minor Hindrance, won't fight at all as Major. 

Phobia (Minor/Major): The character is afraid of something, and subtracts —1/-2 from all Trait rolls 
in its presence. 

Poverty (Minor): Half starting funds and the character is always broke. 

Quirk (Minor): The individual has some minor but persistent foible that often annoys others. 

Ruthless (Minor/Major): The character does what it takes to get her way. 

Secret (Minor/Major): The hero has a dark secret of some kind. 

Shamed (Minor/Major): The individual is haunted by some tragic event from her past. 

Slow (Minor/Major): Pace 1, reduce running die one step. As Major, Pace -2, -2 to Athletics and 
rolls to resist Athletics. Neither may take the Fleet-Footed Edge. 

Small (Minor): Size and Toughness are reduced by 1. Size cannot be reduced below -1. 

Stubborn (Minor): The character wants his way and rarely admits his mistakes. 

Suspicious (Minor/Major): The individual is paranoid and subtracts2 when Supporting allies. 

Thin Skinned (Minor/Major): The character is particularly susceptible to personal attacks. As a 
Minor Hindrance, he subtracts two when resisting Taunt attacks. As a Major, he subtracts four. 

Tongue-Tied (Major): The character often misspeaks or can’t get her words out. ~1 to Intimidation, 
Persuasion, and Taunt rolls. 

Ugly (Minor/Major): The character is physically unattractive and subtracts 1 or 2 from Persuasion rolls. 

Vengeful (Minor/Major): The adventurer seeks payback for slights against her. As a Major 
Hindrance, she'll cause physical harm to get it. 

Vow (Minor/Major): The individual has pledged himself to some cause. 

Wanted (Minor/Major): The character is wanted by the authorities. 

Yellow (Major): -2 to Fear checks and resisting Intimidation. 

Young (Minor/Major): Minor has 4 attribute points and 10 skill points, extra Benny per session. 
Major has 3 attribute points, 10 skill points, and two extra Bennies per session. 



TRAIT SUMMARIES 
(72) 
a 
peed ATTRIBUTES 

=oO  Agility: Nimbleness, dexterity, and overall physical coordination of muscles and reflexes. 

S Smarts: Raw intellect, perception, and ability to sort and make use of complex information. 

[=] Spirit: Inner strength and willpower. 

2 Strength: Raw muscle power. 

= Vigor: Endurance, health, and constitution. 

[72] SKILLS 

Academics (Smarts): Knowledge of liberal arts, social sciences, literature, history, etc. "4 

% Athletics (Agility): Overall athletic coordination and ability. Climbing, jumping, balancing, 
wrestling, skiing, swimming, throwing, or catching. 

Battle (Smarts): Strategy, tactics, and understanding military operations. A key skill in Mass Battles. 

Boating (Agility): Ability to sail or pilot a boat, ship, or other watercraft. 

% Common Knowledge (Smarts): General knowledge of a character's world. 

Driving (Agility): The ability to control, steer, and operate ground vehicles. 

Electronics (Smarts): The use of electronic devices and systems. 

Faith (Spirit): The arcane skill for Arcane Background (Miracles). 

Fighting (Agility): Skill in armed and unarmed combat. 

Focus (Spirit): The arcane skill for Arcane Background (Gifted). 

Gambling (Smarts): Skill and familiarity with games of chance. 

Hacking (Smarts): Coding, programming, and breaking into computer systems. 

Healing (Smarts): The ability to treat and heal Wounds and diseases, and decipher forensic evidence. 

Intimidation (Spirit): A characters ability to threaten others into doing what she wants. 

Language (Smarts): Knowledge and fluency in a particular language. 

% Notice (Smarts): General awareness and perception. 

| Occult (Smarts): Knowledge of supernatural events, creatures, history, and ways. 

Performance (Spirit): Singing, dancing, acting, or other forms of public expression. 

% Persuasion (Spirit): The ability to convince others to do what you want. 

Piloting (Agility): Skill with maneuvering vehicles that operate in three dimensions, such as airplanes, 
helicopters, spaceships, etc. 

Psionics (Smarts): The arcane skill for Arcane Background (Psionics). 

Repair (Smarts): The ability to fix mechanical and electrical gadgets. 

Research (Smarts): Finding written information from various sources. 

Riding (Agility): A character's skill in mounting, controlling, and riding a tamed beast. 

Science (Smarts): Knowledge of scientific fields such as biology, chemistry, geology, engineering, etc. 

Shooting (Agility): Precision with any type of ranged weapon. 
Spellcasting (Smarts): The arcane skill for Arcane Background (Magic). 

* Stealth (Agility): The ability to sneak and hide. 
Survival (Smarts): How to find food, water, or shelter, and tracking. 

Taunt (Smarts): Insulting or belittling another. Almost always done as a Test (page 108). 
Thievery (Agility): Sleight of hand, pickpocketing, lockpicking, and other typically shady feats. : 

‘Weird Science (Smarts): The arcane skillfor Arcane Background (Weird Science). 1 fi Cat 
a " N ~ ” 

i — — TT

rere eee 



BACKGROUND EDGES 
REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

Alertness N +2 to Notice rolls. 

Ambidextrous N, A d8 Ignore -2 penalty when making Trait rolls with off-hand. 

Arcane N Allows access to the Arcane Backgrounds listed in Chapter 
Background Five. 

Avon Resistarice N, Sp d8 +2 to Trait rolls to resist magical effects; magical damage is 
reduced by 2. 

Improved Arcane N, Arcane +4 to Trait rolls to resist magical effects; magical damage is 
Resistance Resistance reduced by 4. 

Aristocrat N +2 to Common Knowledge and networking with upper class. 

Attractive N, V.dé +1 to Performance and Persuasion rolls. 

Very Attractive . N, Attractive +2 to Performance and Persuasion rolls. 

J After being Shaken or Wounded, melee attacks must be Wild 
Attacks, +1 die type to Strength, +2 to Toughness, ignore one 

Berserk N level of Wound penalties, Critical Failure on Fighting roll 
hits random target. Take Fatigue after every five consecutive 
rounds, may choose to end rage with Smarts roll -2. 

Brave N, Sp dé +2 to Fear checks and -2 to rolls on the Fear Table. 

Size (and therefore Toughness) +1. Treat Strength as one die 
Brawny N, S5tdé, Vdé type higher for Encumbrance and Minimum Strength to use 

weapons, armot, or equipment. 

Link Athletics to Strength instead of Agility (including 
resistance). Short Range of any thrown item increased by +1. 

Brute N, 3:ds. Vds Double that for the adjusted Medium Range, and double again 
for Long Range. 

Charismatic N, Sp d8 Free reroll when using Persuasion. 

Elan N, Sp d8 +2 when spending a Benny to reroll a Trait roll. 

Erte N +1 Persuasion rolls when recognized (Common Knowledge), 
double usual fee for Performance. 

+2 Persuasion when recognized, 5% or more usual fee for 
Famous S, Fame 

Performance. 

Fast Healer N,V ds +2 Vigor when rolling for natural healing; check every 3 days. 

Fleet-Footed N,A dé Pace +2, increase running die one step. 

Linguist N, Sm dé Character has dé in languages equal to half her Smarts die. 

Luck N +1 Benny at the start of each session. 

Great Luck N, Luck +2 Bennies at the start of each session. 

Quick N,Ad8 The hero may discard and redraw Action Cards of5 or lower. 

Rich N Character starts with three times the starting funds and a 
$150K annual salary. 

Filthy Rich N, Rich Five times starting funds and $500K average salary. 

hs 

SHILOVHVYHD 



COMBAT EDGES 
REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

[72] 
[=] Block S, Fighting d8 +1 Parry, ignore 1 point of Gang Up bonus. 
1 
[+4 Improved Block V, Block +2 Parry, ignore 2 points of Gang Up bonus. 
o Toughness +1, add d4 to damage from fists; or increase it a die 
S Brawler N, St d8, V d8 

type if combined with Martial Artist, Claws, or similar abilities. 
[#] 

Increase unarmed Strength damage a die type and Toughness 

& Bruiser S, Brawler 
another +1. 

= Ignore up to 2 points of penalties on one action with an Action 
Calculating N, Sm d8 

wn Card of Five or less. 

Combat Reflexes S +2 Spirit to recover from being Shaken. 

Counterattack S, Fighting d8 Free attack against one foe per turn who failed a Fighting roll. 

Improved 
V, Counterattack As Counterattack, but against three foes per turn. 

Counterattack 

WC, N, Athletics Once per turn, double damage from Athletics (throwing) or 
Dead Shot 

or Shooting d8 Shooting roll when dealt a Joker. 

Dodge S,AdS§ -2 to be hit by ranged attacks. 

Improved Dodge S, Dodge +2 to Evasion totals. 

+1 to hit and damage when firing no more than RoF 1 per 
Double Tap S, Shooting d6 

action. 

One adjacent foe doesn’t get a free attack when you withdraw 
Extraction N, A d8 

from close combat. 

Improved Three adjacent foes don’t get free attacks when you withdraw 
S, Extraction 

Extraction from combat. 

You may choose to make foe resist with Smarts instead of 
Feint N, Fighting d8 

Agility during a Fighting Test. 

Free Fighting attack once per round when foe moves within 
First Strike N, A d8 

Reach. 

Improved First H, First Strike Free Fighting attack against up to three foes when they move 
Strike within Reach. 

Free Runner N,A ds Ignore Difficult Ground and add +2 to Athletics in foot chases. 

Frenzy S, Fighting d8 Roll a second Fighting die with one melee attack per turn. 

Improved Roll a second Fighting die with up to two melee attacks per 
V, Frenzy 

Frenzy turn. 

Giant Killer Vv +1d6 damage vs. creatures three Sizes larger or more. 

Ignore Wound penalties when making Vigor rolls to avoid 
Hard to Kill N, Sp d8 

Bleeding Out. 

Rolla die if the character perishes. Even if he’s Incapacitated, 
Harder to Kill V, Hard to Kill 

he survives somehow. 

Improvisational S,Sm dé Ignore -2 penalty when attacking with improvised weapons. 
Fighter 

Iron Jaw N,V ds +2 to Soak and Vigor rolls to avoid Knockout Blows. 

Killer Instinct S The hero gets a free reroll in any opposed Test he initiates. 

Draw an additional Action Card each round and choose which , 
Level Headed S, Sm d8 

one to use. 

Improved Level Draw two additional Action Cards each round and choose 
S, Level Headed 

Headed which one to use. 

rym 



S, Athletics or Ignore up to 2 points of Athletics (throwor iShnoogtin)g  penalties 
Marksman 

Shooting d8 when not moving and firing no more than RoF 1 per action. 

Unarmed Fighting +1, fists and feet count as Natural Weapons, 
Martial Artist N, Fighting d6 add d4 damage die to unarmed Fighting attacks (or increase 

die a step if you already have it). 

Martial Warrior S, Martial Artist Unarmed Fighting +2, increase damage die type a step.’ 

WC, N, 
Mighty Blow Once per turn, double Fighting damage when dealt a Joker. 

Fighting d8 

Nerves of Steel N,V d8 Ignore one level of Wound penalties. 

Improved Nerves N, Nerves of 
Ignore up to two levels of Wound penalties. 

of Steel Steel 

No Mercy 8 +2 damage when spending a Benny to reroll damage. ’£ 

Rapid Fire S, Shooting dé Increase RoF by 1 for one Shooting attack per turn. 

Improved V, Rapid Fire Increase RoF by 1 for up to two Shooting attacks per turn. 
Rapid Fire 

Ignore the Recoil penalty when firing weapons with a RoF of 
Rock and Roll! 5, Shooting d8 

2 or more. 

Steady Hands NA,d8 Ignore Unstable Platform penalty; reduce running penalty to-1. 

N, St d8, Fighting roll at -2 to hit all targets in weapon's Reach, no more 
Sweep 

Fighting d8 than once per turn. 

Improved Sweep V, Sweep As above, but ignore the —2 penalty. 

Trademark N, d8in +1 to Athletics (throwing), Fighting, or Shooting total with a 
Weapon related skill specific weapon; +1 Parry while weapon is readied. 

Imp. Trademark S, Trademark The attack and Parry bonus increases to +2. 
Weapon Weapon 

Make one extra Fighting roll with a second melee weapon in 
Two-Fisted NA,dS 

the off-hand at no Multi-Action penalty. 

Make one extra Shooting (or Athletics (throwing) roll with 
Two-Gun Kid NA,d8 a second ranged weapon in the off-hand at no Multi-Action 

penalty. 

LEADERSHIP EDGES 
(COMMAND RANGE IS 5” OR 10 YARDS) 

REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

Command N, Sm dé +1 to Extras’ Shaken recovery rolls in Command Range. 

Command " 
tay S, Command Increase Command Range to 10" (20 yards) 

Fervor i 5p ds, +1 to Extras’ Fighting rolls in Command Range. 
ommand 

Hold the Line 5 mus, +1 to Extras’ Toughness in Command Range. 
Command 

liane 5 C ak 4 Once per turn, the hero may roll his Battle skill to Support one 
sp "5° type of Trait roll, and apply it to everyone in Command Range 

Natural Leader y i ad Leadership Edges now apply to Wild Cards. 

Tactician CSomomanndd,  bn raw an extra AcActtiioon CaCarrdd eacchh ttuurrnn  thathat mmay  be be assiassigned gned t to 
Battle dé any allied Extra in Command Range. 

Master Tactician V, Tactician Draw and distribute two extra Action Cards instead of one. 

SHILOVHVYHD 



POWER EDGES 
(“AB” IS ARCANE BACKGROUND) 

[72] REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 
[=] 
= Artificer S, AB Allows user to create Arcane Devices. 
[+4 
o Channeling S, AB Reduce Power Point costby 1 with a raise on the activation roll. 

S Concentration S, AB Shaken results don’t cause Disruption (only Stun or Wounds). 
[=] S, AB (Gifted), 

& Extra Effort Increase Focus by +1 for 1 Power Point or +2 for3 Power Points. 
Focus dé 

= 5, AB (Weird 
Spend 3 Power Points to create a device that replicates another 

wn Gadgeteer Science), Weird 
power. 

Science d6 

Holy/Unholy 5S, AB (Miracles), 
Add +1 to +4 to Soak rolls for each Power Point spent. 4 

Warrior Faith dé 

S, AB (Psionics), 
Mentalist Psionics dé +2 to opposed Psionics rolls. 

New Powers N, AB Your character knows two new powers. 

Power Points N, AB Gain 5 additional Power Points, no more than once per Rank. 

WC, N, AB, 
Power Surge Recover 10 Power Points when dealt a Joker in combat. 

arcane skill d8 

Rapid Recharge S, Sp d6, AB Recover 10 Power Points per hour. 
Improved Rapid V, Rapid 

Recover 20 Power Points per hour. 
Recharge Recharge 

S, AB, arcane 
Soul Drain Recover 5 Power Points for a level of Fatigue. 

skill d10 

S, AB (Magic), 
Wizard Spend 1 extra Power Point to change a spell’s Trapping. 

Spellcasting d6 

PROFESSIONAL EDGES 
REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

Character may spend Bennies to Soak damage for his vehicle 
Ace N, A d8 

and ignores up to 2 points of penalties. 

N, AdS, 
Acrobat Free reroll on acrobatic Athletics attempts. 

Athletics d8 

Combat Acrobat S, Acrobat —1 to hit with ranged and melee attacks. 

N, A dS, 
Assassin Fighting dé, +2 to damage foes when Vulnerable or assassin has The Drop: 

Stealth d8 

N, Sm d8, 
Investigator +2 to Research and certain types of Notice rolls. 

Research d§ 

Jack-of-all-Trades N, Sm d10 Gain d4 in a skill (or dé with a raise) until replaced. 

N, Sm de, 
McGyver Repair dé, Quickly create improvised devices from scraps. 

Notice d8 

Mr. Fix It N, Repair d8 +2 to Repair rolls, half the time required with a raise. 

Scholar N, Research d8 +2 to any one “knowledge” skill. 

Strength is one die type higher for Encumbrance and Min Str. 
Soldier N, Sdé,V  dé 

Reroll Vigor rolls when resisting environmental Hazards. 

N, A dS, 
Stealth dé, +1 Thievery, Athletics rolls made to climb, Stealth in urban 

Thief 
environments. 

Thievery dé 

N, Sp dé, 
Woodsman +2 to Survival and Stealth in the wilds. 

Survival d8 



SOCIAL EDGES 
REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

Bolster N, Sp d8 May remove Distracted or Vulnerable state after a Test. 

Common Bond WC, N, Sp d8 The hero may freely give her Bennies to others. 

Connections N Contacts provide aid or other favors once per session. 
Humiliate N, Taunt d8 Free reroll when making Taunt rolls. 

Menacing N, See Text +2 to Intimidation. 

Provoke N, Taunt dé May “provoke” foes with a raise on a Taunt roll. See text. 

Once per turn, affect all foes in a Medium Blast Template with 
Rabble-Rouser S, Spirit d8 

an Intimidation or Taunt Test. 

Reliable N, Sp d8 Free reroll when making Support rolls. as 

A raise when resisting a Taunt or Intimidation attack makes 
Retort N, Taunt dé 

the foe Distracted. 

Streetwise N, Sm dé +2 to Common Knowledge and criminal networking. 

Strong Willed N, Sprd8 +2 to resist Smarts or Spirit-based Tests. 

Tron Will N, Strong Willed +4 to resist Smarts or Spirit-based Tests. 

Once per turn, roll a second die when Supporting via 
Work the Room N, Sp d8 

Performance or Persuasion and apply result to additional ally. 

Work the Crowd S, Work the Room As above, but up to twice per turn. 

WEIRD EDGES 
REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

Beast Bond N The hero may spend Bennies for animals under her control. 

Beast Master N, Sp d8 Animals like your hero and he has a pet of some sort. See text. 

N, Sp d8, 
Champion +2 damage vs. supernaturally evil creatures. 

Fighting dé 

V, Martial Once per combat, reroll failed attack, make enemy reroll 
Chi 

Warrior successful attack, or add +d6 to unarmed Fighting attack. 

Danger Sense N Notice roll at +2 to sense ambushes or similar events. 

Healer N, Sp d8 +2 to Healing rolls, magical or otherwise. 

Alcohol increases Vigor a die type and ignores one level of 
Liquid Courage N,V ds 

Wound penalty; -1 to Agility, Smarts, and related skills. 

Scavenger N, Luck May find a needed item once per encounter. 

LEGENDARY EDGES 
REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY 

Followers WC, L The hero has five followers. 

Professional L, d12 in Trait The character's Trait and its limit increases one step. 

L, Professional 
Expert The character's Trait and its limit increases one step. 

in Trait 

WC, L, 
Master The character's Wild Die is a d10 with a chosen Trait. 

| Expert in Trait 

Sidekick WC, L The character gains a Wild Card sidekick. 

Tough as Nails 1,Vds The hero can take four Wounds before being Incapacitated. 

Tougher than L, Tough 
The hero can take five Wounds before being Incapacitated. 

Nails as Nails, V d12 4 4] 

Weapon Master L, Fighting d12 Parry increases by +1 and Fighting bonus damage die is d8. 

L, Weapon 
Master of Arms Parry increases anothe+r1 and Fighting bonus damage diies d10. 

Master 
. 

Pl iL hL 

SHILOVHVYHD 






TWO 

: GEA ii 

In this section is a sampling of gear from the 
ancient era to the near future. Read the notes GEAR NOTES 
below before you go shopping to understand 
what each of these keywords means. ARMOR 

This is the amount of Armor provided by the 

GOSTS equipment, listed in parentheses beside the 
wearer's total Toughness. Unless an attacker 

Characters are assumed to have clothes and states otherwise, hits are always directed at 
other personal items. In modern settings, the victim's torso. 
they also have a place to live, tools, maybe a 

Worn Armor stacks with natural Armor 
vehicle, and basic necessities as befit the era. 

(such as scaly skin) at its full value. 
The starting funds of $500 are for 

Worn Armor also stacks with one other 
“adventuring gear” in addition to these 

layer. The lesser armor adds half its value 
personal items. Prices are set mostly in 

(rounded down) to the total and increases the 
modern terms. For older or futuristic items, 

heavier armor’s Minimum Strength penalty 
they're set relative to the starting funds. This 

a die type. Wearing a chain shirt (+3) beneath 
can often cause some strange results — a nice 

plate mail (+4), adds +1 to the wearer's armor 
suit in 1920 costs around $20 in the real world 

value, for a total of +5, and increases the 
rather than the $200 listed he—rbeut the 

Minimum Strength requirement to d12. 
starting funds are higher than most people 
had as well. ARMOR PIERGING (AP) 
Some items are also extremely difficult to The weapon or round ignores this many 

price because they were typically made with points of Armor. A weapon with an AP value 
forced labor — like catapults or trebuchets of 4, for instance, ignores 4 points of Armor. 
created by engineers and soldiers in the field. Excess AP is simply lost. 
Their prices reflect an estimate of the time and 
resources needed to create them. GALIBER 
Use the prices listed in this book for quick The number listed in parentheses after 

games or as a baseline for campaign worlds of firearms is the caliber of bullet it fires. Use this 
your own creation. Our official Savage Worlds when figuring ammunition costs or trying to 
settings have all new equipment lists and figure out if the ammo from one weapon fits 
prices specific to their time and environment. in another. Rifle and pistol ammo are not 

interchangeable unless otherwise noted. 



DAMAGE 
Damage is listed in terms of dice. Projectile This lists the weapon’s Short, Medium, and 
weapons have fixed damage (such as 2d6). Long Range. Extreme Range is up to 4 x its 
Melee weapons have damage based on the Long Range. See Ranged Attacks on page 
wielder’s Strength die plus another die, as 93 for Shooting or Athletics (throwing) 
listed under individual weapon entries. A modifiers and more details. 
dagger, for instance, inflicts Str+d4 damage. Ranges are listed in inches so you can 

use a ruler to move, shoot, and fight on the 
HEAVY WEAPON (HW) tabletop with miniatures. If you're not using 
The weapon can affect vehicles or other miniatures, each inch is equal to two yards. 
devices with Heavy Armor (see page 82). 

Weapon ranges are “effective” ranges for 

HIGH EXPLOSIVE (HE) the table-top. If you need to know the real 
world range of a weapon (for battles that 

High explosive rounds use a blast template, 
don’t take place on the table-top, for instance), 

the size of which is listed in the weapon or 
multiply each range bracket by 2.5. 

ammunition’s notes. See the rules for Area of 
Effect on page 97. RATE OF HIRE 

This is the number of shots that may be fired 
by this weapon in a single action. See Ranged 

Certain items have a “Minimum Strength” 
Weapons on page 93 for further details. 

required to use without penalty. Note that 
some items list a d4 since it is possible to have 
a Strength lower than d4. 

Weapons with “Reach” allow their user to 
= ARMOR/WORN GEAR: Each die type differ- make Fighting attacks at the listed range. A 
ence between the character’s Strength and Reach of 1, for example, allows a character to 
the item’s Minimum Strength inflicts a -1 strike a target 1" distant. Weapons without a 
penalty to Pace (minimum of 1"), Agility, Reach value can only strike targets at arm’s 
and Agility-related skill rolls. This is length (adjacent). 
cumulative for those weak but determined 

Reach can be very important when fighting 
adventurers who wear or use multiple 

from horseback and against mounted foes 
items too heavy for their build. 

(see page 103). 
= MELEE/THROWN WEAPONS: A thrown 
or melee weapon's damage die is limited 
by the user's Strength die. If a scrawny Reloading magazines, clips, and individual 
kid (Strength d4) picks up a long sword bullets in modern firearms is explained in 
(Str+d8), he rolls d4+ d4 damage instead detail on page 105. 
of d4+d8. Also, if the user's Strength is 

Some weapons, such as muskets and heavy 
less than its Minimum Strength, he doesn’t 

crossbows, are much slower to reload. Once 
benefit from any of the weapon's positive 

fired, the number after the word Reload is 
abilities such as Reach or Parry bonuses. He 

how many actions of reloading it takes before 
still retains any penalties, however. 

they can be fired again. 
= RANGED WEAPONS: The user suffers a -1 
attack penalty for each die step difference 
between his Strength and the weapon's Certain weapons, such as heavy sniper rifles, 
minimum. are very inaccurate if fired from the hip 

rather than using their sights, scopes, bipod, 
or tripod. If a character moves in the round 

The weapon adds the bonus to the character's he fires a Snapfire weapon, he suffers a —2 
Parry score. If a character wields a weapon Shooting penalty. 
in each hand, penalties to Parry stack 
but bonuses do not (unless she has the 
Ambidextrous Edge). 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



COMMON GEAR 
A few military weapons can fire three rounds ITEM COST WEIGHT 
in rapid succession with one pull of the trigger. 

ANIMALS & TACK 
If the weapon has this ability, its RoF is 1 in 
that mode but it fires three bullets at once and Horse 300 —- 

adds +1 to the Shooting and damage rolls. War Horse 750 — 

Saddle 10 10 

Elaborate Saddle 50 10 
A two-handed weapon can be used with 

ADVENTURING GEAR 
one hand at a —4 penalty. He counts his 
full Strength for damage but loses all other Backpack 50 2 

advantages such as Reach or Parry bonuses. om 54 
Blanket 10 4 

Camera (disposable) 10 1 
Most of the time you don’t need to worry 
about how much weight a character is Camera (regular) 75 2 

carrying. If it becomes important to track, Camera (digital) 300 1 

use the Encumbrance Levels table below. If a Candle (one hour, 2" radius) 1 1 
character carries more than the listed weight, Canteen (waterskin) 5 1 
he’s Encumbered. 

Crowbar 10 2 
Encumbered characters subtract 2 from 

First Aid Kit 10 1 
Pace (minimum 1"), running rolls, Agility and 

Notes: Three uses, see Healing on page 96. 
all linked skills, and Vigor rolls made to resist 
Fatigue (see page 100). Flashlight (10” beam) 20 3 

At three times the lifted weight or more, he Flask (ceramic) 5 1 

can move at a Pace of 1 for anumber of rounds Flint and Steel 3 1 

equal to his Vigor. Every round thereafter he Goggles 20 1 
must succeed at a Vigor roll or take a level Grappling Hook 100 2 
of Fatigue. 

Hammer 10 1 
The maximum weight a character can lift or 

Handcuffs (manacles) 15 2 
carry is four times the listed weight. 

Lantern (4 hours, 4" radius) 25 3 

ENCUMBRANCE Lighter — 

STRENGTH CAN CARRY WEIGHT UPTO... Lockpicks 200 1 

d4 201bs Medic Kit 100 4 
Notes: Five uses, ignores 1 point of Wound 

dé 401bs 
penalties; $25 to refill. 

ds 60 Ibs 
Qil (for lantern; one pint) 2 1 

d10 80 Ibs Quiver (holds 20 arrows/ 25 
2 

d12 100 Ibs bolts) 

Each +1 +20 Ibs Rope, hemp (10"/20 yards) 10 15 

Rope, nylon (10"/20 yards) 10 
Bulky Items: Carrying a bulky, awkward, 

Shovel 5 
or unbalanced item, such as a large box, 
treasure chest, a person, and so on, may make Soap 1 0.2 

a character Encumbered despite its actual Tool Kit 200 
weight (GM's call). Torch (one hour, 4” radius) 5 

Umbrella 5 

Whistle 2 

Whetstone 5 

N=Wu €}] 



ITEM COST WEIGHT ITEM COST WEIGHT 

CLOTHING PERSONAL DEFENSE 
Jl Boots, Hiking 100 2 Pepper Spray 15 0.5 
= Camouflage Fatigues 20 3 Notes: Use Shooting (or Fighting if engaged). 
fast ; No Range penalty but max range is 2" (about 
(=) Clothing, Casual 20 2 10 feet), Shots 5, victim must make Vigor roll 
= Clothing, Formal 200 3 at—2 or be Stunned (page 106). 

a Winter Gear (cloak/parka) 200 3 Stun Gun 25 0.5 
eZ Winter Boots 100 1 Notes: Uses Shooting. Range 1/2/4. Shots 3 
=] before needing to be recharged for at least 
= COMPUTERS & ELECTRONICS —— two hours. Victims must make a Vigor roll at 

Desktop 800 20 —2 or be Stunned. 
GPS 250 1 SURVEILLANCE 
Hand held 250 1 “Bug” (Micro Transmitter) 30 — 
Laptop 1.200 5 Notes: 12 hours of continuous use. 

FIREARMS ACCESSORIES ——— Dutton Camera 50 i 
: . Notes: 12 hours of continuous use. 

Bipod/Tripod 100 2 
Notes: Takes an action to deploy. Negates Cellular Interceptor 650 5 
Recoil and Min Str penalties. Lineman’s Telephone 150 J] 

Laser/Red Dot Sight 150 il Notes: Repair roll to tap into a phone line. 
Notes: +1 to Shooting at Short and Medium Night Vision Goggles 500 2 

Range. Notes: No penalty for Dim or Dark 
Rifle Scope 100 2 Illumination (see page 102). For double the 
Notes: Cancels 2 additional points of price the goggles are “active” and ignore all 
penalties when Aiming, page 97. Nlumination penalties. 

FOOD Parabolic Microphone 750 4 
FaatPood Meal 8 1 Notes: Hear whispers up to 200 yards distant. 

Good Meal (restaurant) 15+ — Telephone Tap 250 = 
MRE (Meal Ready to Eat) 10 1 Transmitter Detector 525 1 

Trail Rations 10 5 
Notes: 5 meals; keeps one week. 

AMMO 
AMMO COST WEIGHT NOTES 

Arrows/Bolts L 1/2 arrows 11bs/5 arrows Arrows for bows, bolts for crossbows 

Bullets ! / 
Small 10/50 rounds 11bs/50 .22 to .32 caliber 
Medium 20/50 rounds 21bs/50 9mm to .45 caliber 
Large 50/50 rounds 15 1bs/50 -50 caliber and larger rounds 

Laser Batteries, x | 
Pistol 20 0.25 Provides one full magazine for the 
Rifle, SMG 20 05 listed weapon 
Gatling i 50 4 

Shot (w/powder) 1/10 shots 0.51bs/10 For black powder weapons 

Shotgun i | 
Shells 15/25 1.5 Ibs/25 Standard buckshot 
Slugs ) 20/25 1.5 1bs/25 See page 105. | 

Sling stones | 2/20 stones 1 1bs/20 po 
EE — 



—— a ~~ — — 
Armor is written in parentheses next to a character's Toughness, like this: 11 (2). This means 
2 points of the character's 11 Toughness comes from Armor. An Armor Piercing attack can 
bypass those 2 points but not the other 9. 
Note that greaves (leg guards) and vambraces (arm guards) are listed as pairs. Halve the 

weight and cost if a character wears only half the set (Minimum Strength doesn’t change). 

MEDIEVAL & ANCIENT ARMOR 
ITEM ARMOR MIN STR. WEIGHT 

CLOTH/LIGHT LEATHER 
Heavy winter clothing, supple leather armor, soft hides. 

Jacket (torso, arms) + d4 5 20 

Robes (torso, arms, legs) +1 dd 8 30 

Leggings (legs) +1 dd 5 20 

Cap (head) +1 d4 1 5 

THICK LEATHER/ TOUGH HIDES 
Boiled leather, cuir bouilli, alligator hides. 

Jacket (torso, arms) +2 dé 8 80 

Leggings (legs) +2 de 7 40 

Cap (head) +2 dé 1 20 

CHAIN MAIL 
Chain, splint, metal scale, ring mail, samurai armor. 

Shirt (torso, arms) +3 ds 25 300 

Leggings (legs) +3 ds 10 150 

Chain Hood (head) +3 ds 4 25 

BRONZE ARMOR (PRE-IRON AGE SETTINGS) 
Typically only found in ancient times or pre-iron civilizations. 

Bronze Barding (horse) +3 d10 50 1,500 

Bronze Corselet (torso) +3 ds 13 80 

Vambraces (arms) +3 ds 5 40 

Greaves (legs) +3 ds 6 50 
Bronze Helmet (head) +3 ds 6 25 

PLATE MAIL 
Heavy steel armor made with “plates” of metal. 

Plate Barding (horse) +4 d10 50 1,500 

Corselet (torso) +4 d10 30 500 

Vambraces (arms) +4 d10 10 200 

Greaves (legs) +4 d10 10 200 

Helm, Pot (head) + d10 4 100 

Helm, Enclosed (head) +1 d10 8 200 

“LOTTA REMEMEEZ GEAR COSTS AZE RELATIVE TO THEIZ 

USUAL PETZIODS — NOT ACTUAL PRRUCES. | MIGHT WANT TO CHANGE 
THEM AS BED AND GABE GO DIMENSION—HOPPING:” 

~The &M 



Ballistic Protection: Armor marked with an asterisk reduces the damage from bullets by 4. “Bullets” includes 
physical shot fired from a firearm. 

ApplAyP only to the item's actual Armor value. 

ITEM ARMOR MIN STR. WEIGHT COST 1 

CLOTH/LEATHER 
Heavy winter clothing, leather jacket or pants, , chaps. 

Thick Coat, Leather Jacket (torso, arms) +1 d4 B 100 

Leather Riding Chaps (legs) +1 d4 5 70 

Kevlar Riding Jacket (torso, arms) +2 d4 8 350 

Kevlar Riding Jeans (legs) +2 d4 4 175 

Bike helmet (head) +2 d4 1 50 | 

Motorcycle Helmet (head) +3 d4 3 100 

BODY ARMOR 
Flak jackets, bulletproof vests, body armor, and bombproof suits. 

Flak Jacket (Vietnam-era, torso) +2 dé 10 40 

Kevlar Vest (torso) oy de 5 200 

Kevlar Vest with ceramic inserts (torso) +4* ds 17 500 

Kevlar helmet (head) +4* d4 5 80 

Bombproof Suit (entire body) +10 di2 80 25K 
Notes: Bombproof suits arent built for flexibility except in the hands, which are uncovered. Agility 
and related skills that require more than manual dexterity cannot exceed d6 while wearing the 
suit, and Pace is reduced by 2 ( 

ARMOR MIN STR. WEIGHT 

LIGHT/CIVILIAN ARMOR 
Energy Skin: Any armor listed below may be treated with an "energy skin” (or skein) to diffuse energy, 
reducing damage from lasers by 4. This costs 50% of the armor treated and is very shiny, subtracting 2 from 
Stealth rolls based on vision. 

Body Armor (torso, arms, legs) +4* d4 4 200 
Notes: Light, armored clothing made from complex polymers or advanced ballistic weave. 

MILITARY ARMOR 
Armor used by private or state armed forces. 

Infantry Battle Suit (torso, arms, legs) +6 dé 12 800 
Notes: A full suit of armor with boots and gloves. 

Battle Helmet (head, full face) dé 2 100 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



Shields add to a character's Parry as shown below. Cover subtracts from ranged attacks from the front and 
shielded side (attacks from the rear or unprotected side ignore cover). 

Medieval shields are Hardness 10 and provide +2 armor should someone attempt to shoot through them 
(see Obstacles on page 99). Modern shields are Hardness 12 and also provide +2 Armor. Polymer shields 
are Hardness 10 and provide Armor +4. 
While worn, shields can be used to bash for Str+d4 damage. 

TYPE PARRY COVER MIN STR. WEIGHT COST 

ANCIENT & MEDIEVAL 

Small +1 — d4 4 50 

Medium +2 -2 de 8 100 

Large +3 —4 d8 12 200 

MODERN 

Riot Shield +3 —4 d4 5 80 

Ballistic Shield +3 —4 dé 9 250 
Notes: Reduces damage from firearms by 4 when an attacker tries to shoot through it. 

FUTURISTIC 

Polymer Shield, Small El — d4 2 200 

Polymer Shield, Medium +2 -2 d4 4 300 

Polymer Shield, Large +3 —4 dé 6 400 



[72] __
a   SONALWEAPONS 
| 
[+4 
o MELEE WEAPONS 

S MIN 

[=] DAMAGE STR. WEIGHT COST NOTES 

& MEDIEVAL = 

= Axe, Hand Str+d6 dé 2 100 

0 Axe, Battle Str+d8 ds 4 300 

Axe, Great Str+d 10 d10 7 400 AP 2, Parry -1, two hands 

Club, Light Str+d4 d4 2 25 A sign of low status or thuggery 

Club, Heavy Str+d6 dé 5 50 A sign of low status or thuggery 

Dagger/Knife Str+d4 d4 i 25 — 

Flail Str+d6 dé 3 200 Ignores shield bonus 

Halberd Str+d8 ds 6 250 Reach 1, two hands 

Katana Str+d6+1 dé 3 1,000 Two hands 

Mace Str+dé dé 4 100 — 

Maul Str+d10  d10 10 400 mane taresk 
Pike Str+d8 ds 18 400 Reach 2, two hands 

Rapier Str+d4 d4 2 150 Parry +1 

Spear Str+d6 dé 3 100 Reach Parer *l fused 
Staff Str+d4 d4 4 10 Parry +1, Reach 1, two hands 

Sword, Great Str+d10 d10 6 400 Two hands 

Sword, Long Str+d8 d8 3 300 Basic swords and scimitars 

Sword, Short Str+d6 dé 2 100 Includes cavalry sabers 

Warhammer Str+d6 dé 2 250 Spiked, AP 1 

MODERN 

A shotgun shell on a stick used in 
Bangstick 3dé6 dé 2 5 melee; must be reloaded with a 

fresh shell (one action) 

Bayonet Str+d4 d4 1 25 a y oie io 

Billy Club/Baton Str+d4 d4 1 10 Often carried by law enforcement 

Brass Knuckles Str+dd dd 1 20 Donen I
Chainsaw 2d6+4 dé 20 200 Critical Failure hits the user 

Switchblade Str+d4 d4 0.5 10 -2 to be Noticed if hidden 

Survival Knife Str+dd dd 1 50 Sa handle add #1 10 
FUTURISTIC 

Molecular Knife Str+d4+2 d4 0.5 250 AP 2, Cannot be thrown 

Molecular Sword Str+d8+2 dé 2 500 AP4 

Laser Sword Str+d6+8 d4 2 1,000 AP12 
72 



Thrown axes and knives, bows, nets, slings, and spears are available in most every era or setting. 

MIN 
TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF STR. WEIGHT COST 

MEDIEVAL 

Axe, Throwing 3/6/12 Str+d6 — 1 da 3 100 

Bow 12/24/48 2de - 1 dé 3 250 

Crossbow (Hand Drawn) 10/20/40 2d6 2 1 dé 5 250 
Notes: Hand-drawn. 

Crossbow, Heavy 15/30/60 2d8 2 1 dé 8 400 
Notes: Requires a windlass to load. Reload 2. 

Dagger/Knife 3/6/12 Str+d4 ro 1 d4 1 25 

Long Bow 15/30/60 2de 1 1 ds 3 300 

Net (Weighted) 3/6/12 —- - 1 d4 8 50 
Notes:A  successful hit means the target is Entangled (see page 98). The net is Hardness 10 and 
vulnerable only to cutting attacks. 

Sling (Athletics (throwing)) 4/8/16 Str+d4 — 1 d4 1 10 

Spear/Javelin 3/6/12 Str+d6 — ih de 3 100 

MODERN 

Compound Bow 12/24/48 Str+d6 1 1 de 3 200 

Crossbow 15/30/60 2d6 2 1 dé 7 300 

BLACK POWDER WEAPONS 
Black powder weapons are Reload 3. 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS Min WEIGHT COST 

PISTOLS 

Flintlock Pistol 510/20 24641 0 — 1 = d4 3 150 
MUSKETS 

a 10/20/40 2d8 ~ a = d6 15 300 
Blondelouss 10/2040  1-3d6 — 1 oA: dé 12 300 
Notes: Treat as Shotgun, see page 105. 

RIFLED MUSKETS 

Kentucky Rifle 15/30/60 2d8 2 1 = d6 8 300 
Notes: Reload 4. The tight rifling requires four actions to reload instead of the usual three. 

Springfield Model 
15/30/60 2d8 — 1 — de 11 250 

1861 

Smoothbore Musket 



MODERN HREARMS J 
a dP A mPa AS AL ae 
reed 

& PISTOLS | 
= RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS oy WEIGHT COST 
[%) ; 

O REVOLVERS 
£ Revolvers typically have six chambers that must be reloaded one bullet at a time, though separate cylinders 
< called “speed loaders" are also available for more modern firearms for about 10% of the weapon's cost. 

wn Derrin ger (41) 3/6/12 2d4 — 2 2 d4 1 100 
Notes: -2 to be Noticed if hidden | 

Police Revolver (.38) 10/20/40 2d6 - 1 6 d4 2 150 

Colt Peacemaker (45) 12/24/48 2d6+1 1 1 6 d4 4 200 

Smith & Wesson (.357) 12/24/48 2d6+1 1 1 6 d4 5 250 

SEMI-AUTOMATICS 
Semi-automatics are fed from a magazine. The standard size magazines are listed below. Additional 
magazines may be purchased for 10% of the weapon's cost. They weigh about 11b each, fully loaded. 

Colt 1911 (.45) 12/24/48 2d6+1 il 1 7 d4 4 200 

Desert Eagle (.50) 15/30/60 2d8 2 1 7 dé 8 300 

Glock (9mm) 12/24/48 2d6 1 1 17 d4 3 200 

Ruger (.22) 10/20/40 2d4 - 1 9 d4 2 100 

SUBMACHINE GUNS 
Typical magazine sizes are listed with each weapon. Additional magazines are available at 10% of the weapon's 
cost and weigh about 11b each, fully loaded. 

MIN 
TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS STR. WEIGHT COST 

H&K MP5 (9mm) 12/24/48 2d6 il 3 30 dé 10 300 

Tommy Gun (.45) 12/24/48 2d6+1 1 3 20 dé 13 350 
Notes: Thompson submachine guns may also use a 50-round drum. This increases the weight by 2 
Ibs and each loaded drum costs $50. 

Uzi (9mm) 12/24/48 2d6 1 3 32 d4 9 300 

SHOTGUNS 
Shotguns fire a spread of pellets (called “shot” or "buckshot”) to increase the shooter's chance of hitting his | 
target. Up close, the blast can be devastating. See Shotguns on page 105 for details. 

MIN 
TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS STR. WEIGHT COST 

Double-Barrel 12/24/48 1-3d6 _— 1 2 dé 11 150 

Pump Action 12/24/48 1-3d6 - 1 6 d4 8 150 

Sawed-Off DB 5/10/20 1-3d6 — 1 2 d4 6 150 

Streetsweeper 12/24/48 1-3d6 —- 1 12 dé 10 450 

“Tommy” Gun 
M1911 Colt .45 



RIFLES 
Rifles can be either bolt-action, lever-action, or fed from a magazine or clip, noted in its description. Additional 
magazines or clips cost 10% of the rifle and weigh 11b each. 

MIN 
TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS STR. WEIGHT COST 

LEVER- AND BOLT ACTION RIFLES 

Barrett (.50) 50/100/200 2d10 4 1 10 ds 35 750 
Notes: Heavy Weapon, Snapfire. Barretts use a 10-shot removable magazine that weighs 2 Ibs 
when loaded. They are almost always fitted with a scope. 

M1 Garand (.30-06) 24/48/9% 2d8 2 1 8 dé 10 300 
Notes: The standard US infantry rifle in World War II. 

Hunting Rifle (.308) 24/48/9% 2d8 2 1 5 dé 8 350 
Notes: Snapfire. 

Sharps Big 50 (.50) 30/60/120 2d10 2 1 1 ds 11 400 
Notes: Snapfire. 

Spencer Carbine (.52) 20/40/80 2d8 2 1 7 d4 8 250 

Winchester ‘73 (44-40) ~~ 24/48/96 2d8-1 2 1 15 dé 10 300 

ASSAULT RIFLES 

AK47 (7.62mm) 24/48/96 2d8+1 2 3 30 dé 10 450 

M-16 (5.56mm) 24/48/9% 2d8 2 S 20/30 dé 8 400 
Notes: The A-2 version can also fire a Three-Round Burst (see page 67). 

Steyr AUG (5.56mm) 24/48/96 2d8 2 3 30 dé 8 400 
Notes: May fire a Three-Round Burst (see page 67). 

Machine guns are heavy, fully automatic weapons built to withstand prolonged fire. Most are fed by belts 
or drums and thus have far more ammo capacity than assault rifles, despite similar calibers and rates of fire. 

Weapon Mount: Most machine-guns require a bipod, tripod, or vehicle mount to fire, which eliminates any 
Strength requirement and the Recoil penalty (see page 105). Their Minimum Strength is listed as "NA or 
“Not Applicable” If a weapon has a Minimum Strength listed, it may be fired from the hip with the Snapfire 
and Recoil penalties. 

Minimum Rate of Fire: Machine-guns have a minimum Rate of Fire of 2 unless otherwise noted. 

Reloading: Machine guns are Reload 2, which includes changing belts or drums, cocking, etc. 

MIN 
TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS STR. WEIGHT COST 

Browning Automatic 
Rifle (BAR) (.30-06) 20/40/60 2d8 2 3 20 ds 17 300 

Notes: Rate of Fire 1 to 3. Uses magazines (one action to Reload instead of the usual 2). 

Gatling (.45) 24/48/96 2d8 2 3 100 NA 170 500 
Minigun (7.62mm) 30/60/120 2d8+1 2 5 4000  d10 85 100K 
Notes: Minimum Rate of Fire 3, requires backpack harness with ammo which weighs an additional 
85 pounds when full (carries 4000 linked rounds). 

M2 Browning (.50 Cal)  50/100/200 2d10 4 3 200 NA 84 1,500 
Notes: Heavy Weapon. 

M60 (7.62mm) 30/60/120 2d8+1 2 3 100 ds 33 6,000 

MG42 (7.92mm) 30/60/120 2d8+1 2 4 200 d10 26 750 

SAW (5.56mm) 30/60/120 2d8 2 4 200 ds 20 4,000 



LASERS (FUTURISTIC) 
Lasers fire intensely focused beams ofl ight to penetrate and burn their targets. 
Cauterize: Anyone Incapacitated by a laser blast adds +2 to his Vigor rolls to keep from Bleeding Out. 

overchargTeh:e lasers below can overcharge to cause an extra dé damage, but if any of the Shooting dice 
are a 1, the weapon must cool down for a full round before it can be fired again. 
No Recoil: Pistols, SMGs, and rifles ignore the Recoil penalty. Gatling lasers still take the penalty, however, 
which is why they're usually mounted on a tripod. 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF SHOTS STR. WEIGHT COST 

Pistol 15/30/60 2d6 2 1 50 d4 2 250 

SMG 15/30/60 2d6 2 4 100 d4 4 500 

Rifle 30/60/120 3d6 2 3 100 dé 8 700 

Gatling Laser 50/100/200 3d6+4 2 4 800 ds 20 1,000 

4 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



~ SPEGIAL WEAPONS 
a — 

Cannons are used to destroy city walls or break up large troop formations. The leader of the weapon's crew 
makes the Shooting roll. 

Bombard: Assuming they have a rough idea of their target's location, howitzers, mortars, and bombards may 
fire at targets they cannot see by lobbing projectiles over intervening terrain or obstacles. Bombarding suffers 
a -4 penalty in addition to all other modifiers, and doubles deviation when the Shooting roll is failed (see 
Area Effect Attacks, page 97). Reduce the penalty to -2 with precise coordinates (such as from a spotter). 

Cannons can fire three different types of shells: solid shot, shrapnel, and canister. The crew can pick the type 
of ammunition to be loaded each time it reloads. 

= Solid Shot: Heavy balls of iron, lead, or stone designed to batter walls or plow through packed ranks of 
troops. To fire, the leader of the crew makes a Shooting roll as usual. If successful, roll a die. If even, it 
bounces to another victim behind and within 6" of the first and hits him as well. Continue in this way until 
the die roll is odd. 

= Shrapnel: Explosive shells filled with small metal balls that explode outward in a shower of debris. This is 
an area effect attack and uses the Medium Blast Template unless otherwise noted. 

= Canister: Grapeshot or canister is a shell that detonates inside the barrel of a cannon and fires out a spray 
of deadly balls or other debris like a giant shotgun. The attack is the size of a Medium Blast Template and 
moves in a straight line upto 24" (it affects dé targets if not using miniatures, or 2d6 if they're tightly packed). 
Compare the Shooting roll to every target within using a base TN of 4, adjusted for each target's cover, 
special abilities like the Dodge Edge, etc. A hit causes 2d6 damage and a raise causes 3d6. 

Note: All types of shot are Heavy Weapons, Reload 8. Two crew members may reload at the same time. 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF BLAST WEIGHT COST 

Cannon (12 Ib) - ByAnmoType  ——u— 1200 10K 

Canister 24" path 2d6 — 1 MBT — 50 

Solid Shot 50/100/200 3d6+1 4 1 = - 50 

Shrapnel 50/100/200 3dé6 — 1 MBT a 50 

C PULTS 
Catapults are simple devices that hurl large stones at enemy defenses or ranks of troops. They normally 
require a crew of eightto load the projectile, crank down the lever that propels it, then sight and aim it. Firing 
can be done by a single person, but loading the projectile takes at least four. 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF BLAST WEIGHT CosT 

Catapult 24/48/96 3d6 4 Special MBT = 10K 
Notes: Heavy Weapon, Reload time is every 5 minutes with a crew of 4. 

Trebuchet 30/60/120 3d8 4 Special MBT — 50K 
Notes: Heavy Weapon, Reload time is every 5 minutes with a crew of 4. 



FLAMETHROWERS 
Flamethrowers propel incendiary liquid or gas to incinerate their targets. They are Heavy Weapons, use the 

(72) 
a Cone Template (see Area Effect Attacks, page 97), and may be Evaded (page 100). 

peed Armor protects normally, but flammable targets may catch fire (see Fire, page 127). 
= 
oO For vehicular flamethrowers, see page 80. 

S MIN 
TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP 2{e]3 SHOTS STR. WEIGHT COST 

[=] 

2 Flamethrower Cone 3d6 — 1 10 ds 70 300 
S= 

Template 
 

[72] 
Grenades activate when their safety pin is pulled, then detonate a few seconds later. They are thrown with 
the Athletics skill at the Ranges listed below, and cannot make use of Extreme Range (see page 93). 

All grenades are Heavy Weapons and detonate in the listed blast template (see Area Effect Attacks, page 97). 

Grenades may be Evaded. See Evasion, page 100. 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF BLAST WEIGHT COST 

Mk II (WW2 Pineapple) ~~ 4/8/16 3dé6 — — MBT il 40 

Potato Masher (WW2) 5/10/20 3d6-2 — — MBT 2 50 

Mk67 (Modern) 5/10/20 3dé6 — — MBT 1 50 | 

Smoke Grenade 5/10/20 - — — LBT 1 50 
Notes: Creates an area of smoke in a LBT that obscures vision (-4). 

Stun Grenade 5/10/20 — — _— LBT 1 50 
Notes: Targets must make a Vigor roll (at -2 with a raise) or be Stunned (see page 106). 

These additional rules get a bit picky, but they represent the cinematic shenanigans— 
and real-life heroics — players often look for in their game. 
Grenades in the modern era and earlier explode after mechanisms inside trigger the 

detonator — typically a delay of three to five seconds depending on make and model 
after the pin is pulled to initiate detonation. 
Hot Potato: Because of the delay in the grenade’s detonation, one character (and one 

only) in the blast radius can attempt to pick up and throw the grenade before it goes off. 
This is an Athletics roll at —4 as a free action (or -2 if he was on Hold, but it consumes 
his held action). Failure means it goes off before he can throw it, causing damage as if 
thrown with a raise (if it wasn’t already). 

Cooking: A character can “cook” a grenade by pulling its pin and counting off a few 
seconds so that it can’t be thrown back. To do so, the attacker first makes a Smarts roll as 
a free action. With success, he times the detonation correctly and it can’t be hurled back 
or Evaded (page 100). Failure means it can be thrown back or Evaded, and a Critical 
Failure on the Smarts roll means it detonates in the attacker’s hand! Roll damage as if 
thrown with a raise. 

Covering Grenades: A character may also throw himself on a grenade. He takes double 
the normal dice of damage for his heroic act, but his total Toughness is subtracted from 
the damage inflicted on other characters in the blast radius. 

% 
a nai EPP A

78 



Mines are explosives planted beneath shallow dirt that detonate in the listed blast template when a person 
(for anti-personnel mines) or vehicle (for anti-tank mines) passes over them. 

Minefields: For dramatic purposes, a character who steps on a mine should get a Notice roll. Failure means 
she realizes it before stepping off and detonating it. Saving the victim requires a Repair roll at 4, but failure 

| detonates the device immediately. 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF BLAST WEIGHT CcosT 

Anti-Personnel Mine —- 2d6+2 - - SBT 10 100 
Notes: Heavy Weapon. 

Anti-Tank Mine - 4de —- - MBT 20 200 
Notes: Heavy Weapon, AP 5 vs. ¥ the vehicle’s Armor value (round up). 

Bouncing Betty = 3dé6 = = SBT 9 125 
Notes: These deadly anti-personnel mines are designed to pop up into the air and rain shrapnel 
down from about head-height. Only full overhead cover offers an Armor bonus against such 
devices. Simply being prone offers no protection from these deadly explosives. 

Claymore Mine - 3d6 — = Special 4 75 
Notes: Claymores fire a spray of deadly steel balls in a 60° frontal arc. Everyone within 12" (24 
yards) is automatically hit. Roll a die for all other targets up to 50” (100 yards). Those who get an 
odd result are also hit. 

MISSILES 
Unless otherwise noted, missiles must “lock” onto their targets before they can be fired. This action is an 
opposed Electronics roll versus the target's maneuvering skill (Boating, Driving, or Piloting, as appropriate). 
Success gives the attacker a “short” lock and allows him to fire up to half the missiles his particular craft can 
fire at once. A raise is a more solid lock and allows him to fire all of them. 

The enemy attempts to evade each missile separately by making a maneuvering roll at 4 (or -2 if the target 
has substantial cover to hide behind — such as asteroids, skyscrapers, canyon walls, or even large enemy ships. 
A Critical Failure means the craft goes Out of Control (see page 119). 

Anti-Missile Systems: Warships and futuristic space vessels often have “point defense” systems to shoot 
down incoming missiles. Operators must be on Hold to shoot down missiles; automated systems attack 
automatically. The system grants a single Shooting roll per missile at Short Range and any other relevant 
modifiers (including Speed — missiles move at Mach 1, a -6 penalty, unless otherwise noted). Unless otherwise 
noted, missiles are objects with a Toughness of 8 (2) (see Breaking Things, page 98). 

TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF BLAST WEIGHT cosT 

TOW 75/150/300 5d10 34 1 MBT 207 60K 
Notes: Heavy Weapon. A wire-guided missile fired from a portable or vehicle-mounted launcher. 
Doesn't require a lock—just a Shooting roll, and can’t be jammed. 

Hellfire 150/300/600 5d10 40 = MBT 100 115K 
Notes: Heavy Weapon. A laser-guided missile fired from a vehicle-mounted launcher. 

Sidewinder 100/200/400 4d8 6 - SBT 188 600K 
Notes: Heavy Weapon. A short range, heat-seeking missile fired from an aircraft. 

Sparrow 150/300/600 5d8 6 - SBT 617 125K 
Notes: Heavy Weapon. A medium range, radar-guided missile fired from an aircraft. 



ROCKET LAUNCHERS & TORPEDOES 
Rocket launchers and early torpedoes are direct-fire weapons that explode on contact with their target. All 

(72) 
a the listed weapons are Heavy Weapons. 

reed TYPE RANGE DAMAGE AP ROF BLAST WEIGHT CosT 
= 
oO AT-4 24/48/96 4d8+2 24 i MBT 15 1,500 

S Notes: A heavy American anti-tank weapon of the modem era. 

[=] Bazooka 24/48/96 4d8 8 1 MBT 12 500 

< Notes: Snapfire. The standard American anti-tank weapon in World War II. Additional warheads 

S weigh 9 1bs and cost $50. WWII price. 

=  M203 40MM 24/48/9% 4d8 - 1 MBT 3 1,500 
[72] 

Notes: Snapfire. A grenade launcher mounted on the bottom of an assault rifle. 

M72 Law 24/48/9% 4d8+2 22 1 MBT 5 750 
Notes: Snapfire. The standard American anti-tank weapon in Vietnam. 

Panzerschreck 15/30/60 4d8 12 il MBT 20 1,000 
Notes: Snapfire. Literally, the “tank terror” rocket launcher used by German forces in World War II. 

Torpedo 300/600/1200 8d10 22 1 LBT 3000 500K 

VEHICULAR WEAPONS 
Below are the most common weapons mounted on military vehicles in the 20th century and beyond. All 
except the medium machine gun and Gatling laser are Heavy Weapons. 

Minimum Ratoef  Fire: Vehicular weapons with a Rate of Fire 3 or higher have a minimum Rate of Fire of 2. 

Heavy Flamethrowers: Vehicular flamethrowers have longer ranges than personal deviceTsh.e wielder can 
use the Cone Template or arc a blast the size ofa Medium Blast Template up to 18" (36 yards) distant. (Use the 
center of the template for the Range.) This shot can Deviate (see Area Effect Attacks, page 97). 

Tank and AT Guns: May fire either Armor Piercing (AP) or High-Explosive (HE) rounds as the gunner chooses. 
AP rounds do additional damage up close. Increase the weapon's damage dice by one when fired at half their 
Short Range or less (so 4d10+2 becomes 5d10+2, for example). 

Costs: Prices of military-grade weapons varies widely depending on setting, and should be considered 
baselines the GM can use to set prices in her campaign world. 

TYPE RANGE AP ROUNDS HE ROUNDS ROF CcosT 

Med. Machine Gun 30/60/120 2d8+1, AP 2 — 3 750 

Heavy Machine Gun ~~ 50/100/200 2d10, AP 4 — 3 1,000 

Heavy Flamethrower Cone or MBT - 3d8 i 1,000 
20mm Cannon 50/100/200 2d12, AP 4 - 4 50K 

25mm Cannon 50/100/200 3d8, AP 4 — 3 75K 

30mm Cannon 50/100/200 3d8, AP 6 - 3 200K 

40mm Cannon 75/150/300 4d8, AP 5 3d8, AP 2, MBT 4 200K 

2 pd AT Gun 75/150/300 4d8, AP 5 3d6, AP 2, MBT 1 75K 

37mm AT Gun 50/100/200 4d8, AP 3 4d6, AP 3, MBT 1 100K 

57mm AT Gun 75/150/300 4d8, AP 5 3d8, AP 3, MBT 1 150K 

75mm Tank Gun 75/150/300 4d10, AP 6 3d8, AP 3, MBT 1 250K 

76mm Tank Gun 75/150/300 4d10, AP 10 3d8, AP 5, MBT 1 300K 

88mm Tank Gun 100/200/400 4d10+1, AP 16 4d8, AP 8, MBT 1 500K 

120mm Tank Gun 100/200/400 5d10, AP 31 4d8, AP 17, MBT 1 800K 

125mm Tank Gun 100/200/400 5d10, AP 30 4d8, AP 15, MBT 1 IM 

FUTURISTIC 

Gatling Laser 50/100/200 3d6+4, AP 4 — 4 1K 

Heavy Laser 150/300/600 4d10, AP 30 - 1 IM 



speeds of vehicles anyway, not their actual 

| VEHIGLES speeds (see Chases, page 113.) 
To convert miles per hour to Pace, multiply 

On the following pages are a number of MPH by 1.5. See the Vehicles on the Tabletop 
sidebar on page 120 to integrate vehicles 

sample vehicles for land, air, and water, 
into tabletop combats with characters. 

including some military vehicles such as 
tanks and armored personnel carriers. ® TOUGHNESS: The vehicle's base durability 

including Armor (in parentheses). Use the 
um SIZE: The Size and Scale of the vehicle 

vehicles included in this book as a guide 
relative to a human (see Scale on page 106 

when creating your own or writing up 
and the Size Table on page 179). Vehicles 

those that aren't listed here. 
can normally take three Wounds before 
they're Wrecked (page 118), but Large To estimate the Armor value of real world 
Vehicles can take one additional Wound, vehicles with Heavy Armor (tanks), start 
Huge vehicles two, and Gargantuan three. with +4 as a base, then add +2 forevery inch 

of armor up to 10”, +1 per inch up to 20", 
= HANDLING: The vehicles responsiveness 

and finally +1 for every two full inches after 
and maneuverability is added or subtracted 

that. A tank with 23” of armor, for example, 
from all its operator's maneuvering 

has an Armor value of (4+20+10+1)=35. 
rolls (Boating, Driving, or Piloting). This 
typically ranges from —4 for particularly Adjust to reflect any other factors such as 
slow or sluggish vehicles to +4 for those that modern composite materials and the like. 
can turn on a dime. PASSENGERS: The number of crew plus 

= TOP SPEED: Top Speed is expressed in any additional passengers it can transport. 
miles per hour (MPH) rather than Pace so A notation of “2 +8,” for example, means it 

it's easier for you to look up real-world requires a crew of two and can carry up to 
vehicles and use them in your game. The eight additional passengers. 
Chase rules only care about the relative u COST: The average price of the vehicle. 



Linked: Weapons of the same type may be 
VEHIGLE NOTES dual or quad linked and fired as one (triple 
Air Bags & Safety Harnesses: Passengers linked is ineffective). Dual linked weapons 
with vehicular protective devices take half add +1 to hit and +2 damage; quad linked 
damage from collisions (round down). See weapons add +2 to hit and +4 damage. 
Wrecked on page 118 for details. Example: A pilot with d8 Shooting in a Spitfire 
Amphibious: The vehicle can enter water (8x machine-guns, RoF 3) rolls 3d8 for each 

without flooding or capsizing. See the wing, adding +2 to his Shooting fotal and +4 
individual descriptions for their movement damage to those rounds that hit. 
rates while in water. 

Night Vision: Various vehicular night 
Anti-Missile Counter Measures (AMCM): vision systems eliminate Dim and Dark 

AMCM systems are electronic jammers, Illumination penalties as long as there is at 
chaff, and flares. They add +2 to a user's least some amount of ambient light. 
maneuvering rolls to evade missiles (see 

Reaction Fire: These weapons have special 
Missiles, page 79). 

abilities in Chases. See page 117. 
Four-Wheel Drive (AWD): Treat each inch 

Sloped Armor: Sloped armor deflects 
of Difficult Ground as 1.5" instead of 2". 

shots away from the hull. Direct-fire ballistic 
Heavy Armor: Only weapons marked as attacks against the vehicle, such as a tank gun 

Heavy Weapons can hurt this vehicle, regard- or bazooka, suffer a 2 Shooting penalty. 
less of the damage roll. This keeps a lucky 

Spacecraft: The vehicleis designed for use in 
pistol shot from destroying a tank. Vehicles 

outer space. Those noted as Atmospheric can 
with Heavy Armor halve damage they take 

enter and exit planetary atmospheres as well. 
from colliding with other obstacles (including 
vehicles) that don’t have Heavy Armor. Stabilizer: A stabilizer reduces the Unstable 

Platform penalty for whatever weapon it’s 
Unless otherwise specified, these vehicles 

attached to (usually the main gun of a tank 
have less protection on their sides and rear. 

or armored vehicle). The penalty is reduced 
Attacks that hit either (GM's call) increase 

to —1 for a Stabilizer and 0 for an Improved 
the weapon's damage dice by one, thus 3d8 

Stabilizer. 
becomes 4d8, for example. 

Stealth Paint: Radar-absorbent black paint 
Hover: The vehicle is a hovercraft and can 

makes the vehicle less detectable by sensors. 
ignore most low terrain obstacles and water. 

Electronics rolls to spot or lock onto the target 
Infrared Night Vision: Thermal imaging are made at —4. 

devices halve Illumination penalties versus 
Tracked: Tracked vehicles can climb over 

targets that give off heat. 
most low obstacles such as logs or low rocks, 
and can push through snow, mud, and other 

GONVERTING FROM slippery surfaces. They ignore movement 
penalties for Difficult Ground. 

PREVIOUS EDITIONS Weapons: Vehicles with weapons note 
Vehicles in this list have slightly different their location for narrative play and for the 
statistics from previous editions: Chase rules (see page 113). Here are the 

most common: 
Acceleration (“Acc”): Acceleration is now 
factored into Handling and Top Speed. = FIXED: The vehicle's weapon fires only in 

the listed direction (typically front or rear 
Climb: Climb has now been factored into 

in a 45° arc). 
each aircraft's Handling value. 

= PINTLE MOUNT: A raised swivel mount 
Pace: Pace in previous editions was based 

that can fire in a 180° arc to the listed 
on “tabletop” speed and much lower than 

direction. If mounted on the turret it must 
the values in this edition. To convert a real 

fire in the same facing as the turret each 
vehicle, look up its actual top speed in 

turn. 
MPH. For fictional vehicles, multiply the 
old Top Speed by 3 to get its Top Speed in = TURRET: The weapon is in a turret and has 
real world MPH. a 360° arc of fire. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



VEHIGLES 5 
nl —n on 

GROUND VEHICLES 
TOPSPEED 

VEHICLE SIZE HANDLING (MPH) TOUGHNESS CREW COST 

CIVILIAN VEHICLES 

Bicycle -1 +1 16 4 1 250 
Notes: 50% chance a shot hits the rider instead. Doubles rider's Pace and running die result. 

Carriage 3 -2 16 6 1+3 1-3K 
Notes: Pulled by one Horse, see page 184. Pace on the tabletop is 12 and it may run. 

Early Car 3 -1 40 id 1+3 1,000 
Notes: Model Ts and the like. 

Street Bike 1 +1 120 8 1+1 3,000 
Notes: Stock name-brand street bikes designed for urban use. 50% chance any uncalled shot hits 
the character instead. 

Dirt Bike 0 +1 80 7 1 2,000 
Notes: Stock bike designed for off-road use with excellent shocks. Off Road (treat as 4WD). 50% 
chance any uncalled shot hits the character instead. 

Compact Car 4 (Large) +1 120 10(2) 1+3 5-14K 
Notes: Honda Civic or similar vehicle. 

Mid-Sized Car 4 (Large) 0 120 11(2) 1+4 30K 
Notes: Air bags, luxury features. 

Minivan 4 (Large) 0 90 12(2) 1+7 25K 
Notes: Typical family mini-van. Air bags, some luxury features. 

Ponslaty 5 (Large) 0 120 14(2) #7 80% 
Notes: Luxury features, Four-Wheel Drive 

Sports Car 4 (Large) +2 160 10(2) 1+3  15-300K 
Notes: Mustang or similar stock sports cars. 

Semi-Truck 9 (Huge) 0* 75 14 (2) 1+1 200K 
Notes: Trailer is Size 7 (Large), Toughness 14 (2). *Handling with a trailer attached is -2. 

WORLD WAR II MILITARY VEHICLES 
Costs are in 1940s dollars and represent “war time" economies. 

Jeep 4 (Large) +1 65 10(2) 243 1,000 
Notes: Four-Wheel Drive. Weapons: Heavy MG (Front Pintle Mount) 

M4 Sherman 8 (Huge) =] 30 24 (8) 5 45K 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Tracked. Weapons: 75mm tank gun (Turret, Stabilizer), Medium MG (Fixed 
front), Heavy MG (Pintle Mount on Turret). 

MS5A1 Stuart 7 (Large) 0 36 21 (7) 4 30K 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Tracked. Weapons: 37mm tank gun (Turret, Stabilizer), Medium MG (Front 
Fixed), Heavy MG (Pintle Mount on Turret). 

T-34/76 7 (Large) ~1 35 24(8) 4 30K 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Sloped Armor (front only), Tracked. Weapons: 76mm tank gun (Turret), 
Medium MG (Front Fixed and in Turret). 

Pz IV] 7 (Large) =1 25 26 (10) 5 45K 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Tracked. Weapons: 75mm gun (Turret), Medium MG (Front Fixed and in 
Turret). 

Pz VI Tiger II 8 (Huge) -2 25 34 (16) 5 120K 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Tracked. Weapons: 88mm tank gun (Turret), Medium MG (Front Fixed and 
in Turret). 



TOP SPEED 
SIZE HANDLING (MPH) TOUGHNESS CREW COST 

MODERN MILITARY VEHICLES 
M1A1 Abrams 9 (Huge) 1 40 57 (37) 4 4M 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Night Vision, Tracked. Weapons: 120mm tank gun (Imp Stabilizer), Medium 
MG (Front Fixed and in Turret), Heavy MG (Pintle Mount on Turret). 
M2 Bradley 7 (Large) 0 40 22 (6) 3+7 3M 

Notes: Heavy Armor, Night Vision, Tracked. Weapons: 25mm Autocannon (Imp Stabilizer), 
Medium MG (In Turret), TOW Launcher. 

T-72 MBT 9 (Huge) =1 50 43 (25) 3 1M 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Tracked. Weapons: 125mm tank gun, Medium MG (In Turret), Heavy MG 
(Pintle Mount on Turret). 

T-80 MBT 8 (Huge) =] 43 52(32) 3 22M 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Night Vision, Tracked. Weapons: 125mm tank gun (Improved Stabilizer), 
Medium MG (In Turret), Heavy MG (Pintle Mount on Turret). 

BTR 70 APC 6 (Large) =1 49 20 (5) 2+8 700K 
Notes: Amphibious, Four-Wheel Drive, Heavy Armor. Weapons: Heavy MG (Turret), Medium MG 
(In Turret). 

FUTURISTIC MILITARY VEHICLES 
These vehicles reflect futuristic economies and advanced designs. The attached Gatling Lasers, for example, 
gain Reaction Fire due to the attached power plant and managed weapon systems. 

Hover Tank 7 (Large) 0 45 38(22) 4 1.2M 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Hover, Night Vision. Weapons: Heavy Laser (Turret, Improved Stabilizer), 
Gatling Laser (Fixed Front, Reaction Fire). 

Hover APC 7 (Large) 0 75 26 (10) 2+14 75K 
Notes: Heavy Armor, Hover. Weapons: Gatling Laser (Fixed Front, Reaction Fire). 

AIRCRAFT 
TOP SPEED 

VEHICLE SIZE HANDLING (MPH) TOUGHNESS CREW COST 

CIVILIAN 

Biplane 4 (Large) +1 125 12(1) 1 150K+ 

Cessna Skyhawk 5 (Large) +1 140 12(2) 1+3 150K+ 

Helicopter 7 (Large) 0 130 12 (2) 1+3 500K+ 

Learjet 8 (Huge) +2 540 16 (2) 2+10 20M+ 

Space Shuttle 13 (Gar.) =1 17K 20 (4) 1+40 250M+ 

WORLD WAR Il MILITARY AIRCRAFT 

B-17 Flying Fortress 10 (Huge) -2 115 19(2) 10 250K 
Weapons: 2x Linked Heavy MG (Fixed front), 2x Linked Heavy MG (Top Turret), 2x Linked Heavy 
MG (Ball Turret), Heavy MG (Fixed Left), Heavy MG (Fixed Right), Bombs. 

BF-109 6 (Large) #1 380 13 (2) 1 35K 
Weapons: 20mm Cannon (Fixed Front), 2x Linked Heavy MG (Fixed Front). 

P-51 Mustang 7 (Large) +1 437 14 (2) 1 50K 
Weapons: 6x Heavy MG (Fixed Front) 

Japanese Zero 6 (Large) +1 350 12(2) 1 30K 
Weapons: 2x Linked Medium MGs (Fixed Front), 2x Linked 20mm Cannons (Fixed Front) 

Spitfire Mk ITA 6 (Large) +1 360 14 (1) 1 40K 
Weapons: 8x Linked Medium MGs (Fixed Front). 

Use the Linked Weapon rules from page 82 to divide guns into the largest possible blocks. Roll the 
machine guns on a Mustang as three sets of two, for example, and a Spitfire as two sets of four. 

84 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



TOP SPEED 
VEHICLE SIZE HANDLING (MPH) TOUGHNESS CREW COST 

MODERN MILITARY AIRCRAFT 

AH-64 Apache 8 (Huge) 0 225 20 (4) 2 35M 
Notes: Helicopter, Night Vision. Weapons: 30mm Cannon (Fixed Front), 16x Hellfire Missiles 

AV-8B Harrier 7 (Large) +1 630 17 (3) 1 28M 
Notes: -1 Handling when in VTOL mode. Weapons: 25mm Cannon (Fixed Front), 2x Sidewinder 
Missiles, Bombs. 

F-15 Eagle 9 (Huge) +2 1,875 18 (4) 1 30M 
Notes: Night Vision. Weapons: 20mm Cannon (Fixed Front), 4x Sidewinder Missiles, 4x Sparrow 
Missiles, Bombs. 

SuU-27 9 (Large) +1 1,550 16 (4) 1 30M 
Notes: Night Vision. Weapons: 30mm Cannon (Fixed Front), 4x Sidewinder Missiles (Soviet equivalent). 

UH-1 (Huey) 7 (Large) +2 120 14.(2) 4+12 25M 
Notes: Helicopter. Weapons: Medium MG (Fixed Left or Right). 

WATERCRAFT 
TOP SPEED 

SIZE HANDLING (MPH) TOUGHNESS CREW COST 

Galleon 14 (Gar) =Z 9 20 (4) 20+80  300K+ 
Notes: Heavy Armor. Weapons: 16x to 46x Cannon (Fixed Left and Right). 

Galley 13 (Gar) -1 20 20(4) 20+100 150K 
Notes: Heavy Armor. Has both oars and sails. Weapons: Catapult (Fixed Front). 

Hydrofoil 10 (Huge) 0 70 15 (3) 1+9 400K+ 

Patrol Boat, River 7 (Large) +1 32 15 (4) 4 $700K 
Notes: Heavy Armor. Weapons: 2x Linked Heavy MG (Front Pintle Mount), 2x Medium (Left and 
Right), Heavy MG (Stern). 

PT Boat (WW2) 12 (Gar) +1 40 142) 10 $250K 
Notes: Heavy Armor. Weapons: 50 cal MG (Front Pintle Mount), Heavy MG (Rear Pintle Mount), 
4x torpedo tubes (Fixed Forward). 

Rowboat 0 = 5 8(1) 1+3 500 

Speed Boat 4 (Large) +1 90 10 (1) 143 60K+ 

Small Yacht 8 (Huge) 0 35 14 (2) 1+9 500K+ 






 GHAPTER THREE 
3,§ 

Savage Worlds provides a simple framework They have two special abilities in the game: 
for your tales of adventure and glory. In this * Wild Cards can take three Wounds before 
chapter we show you how to make basic they're Incapacitated. 
skill and attribute checks — and make your * Wild Cards roll a Wild Die (usually a d6) 
combats Fast, Furious, and Fun! along with their Trait die when making 

Trait rolls and take the highest of the two 
WILD GARDS & EXTRAS as their total (see The Wild Die on the next 

page). 
Your hero (a player character), and unique 
allies, villains, and monsters are collectively 
called “Wild Cards.” These beings have a TRAIT ROLLS 
better chance at doing things, are a little To make a skill or attribute “check” or “roll,” 
tougher to put down, and are generally more simply roll the die assigned to it. If the result 
detailed than common guards, minions, or is a 4 or better (the “Target Number” or TN), 
lackeys — collectively called “Extras.” the action is successful. For example, if a 
Wild Cards are noted with a design of some character's Strength is a d6, he rolls a six- 

sort before their name, like this: sided die. On a 4 or better, he’s successful. 

Modifiers: Circumstances modify the 
W@ RED die roll, such as shooting at something far 
The actual Wild Card symbol varies and is away or finding a well-hidden clue. Some 
usually themed for the particular setting, things, such as ranged attacks, have standard 
such as a skull-and-crossbones for a pirate modifiers. It’s up to the GM to determine any 
game like 50 Fathoms or a marshal’s badge in modifiers for more subjective tasks, such as 
Deadlands. spotting an ambush or eavesdropping on a 
Besides your own characters, it’s up to the conversation through a door. 

Game Master to decide which characters are In general, an easy task, such as finding 
Wild Cards. The sergeant of the City Watch tracks in the mud, is made at +2. A difficult 
probably isn’t a Wild Card, but Sergeant task, such as finding tracks by torchlight, 
Grimlock of the City Watch may be. Skytch is made at -2. A very difficult task, such as 
the Dragon is also a Wild Card, though his finding tracks in a rainstorm, is made at —4. 
three young wyrms aren't. 

Multiple Dice: When a character rolls 
Wild Cards are those who have stepped up multiple dice, such as when firing a machine- 

to do more than most. They dare, aspire, and gun, check each die separately. 
risk it all to be a hero — or a villain! 



THE WILD DIE OPPOSED ROLLS 
Extras roll a single die when making a Trait Sometimes rolls are “opposed” by an 
roll. Wild Cards roll an extra d6 and take the opponent. The attacker gets a Trait total, then 
highest of their Trait die or the “Wild Die.” the defender attempts to beat it. 
Both of these dice can Ace (see below). The exact skills or attributes used in a 
One Wild Die Per Action: When Wild contest are specified in each circumstance, 

Cards roll multiple dice for a single action, or the GM can decide what makes the most 
such as when firing a machine gun, they roll sense. If two characters try to pull something 
only one Wild Die. from each other's hands, for example, they 

The Wild Die may replace a Trait die or make opposed Strength rolls. Sneaking up 
be ignored — it never adds another action or on someone is a Stealth roll opposed by 
attack to the roll. Notice (which is detailed in the Stealth skill 

description). 
Example: Gabe has the Frenzy Edge (page 

The acting character in an opposed roll 
42). He rolls an extra Fighting die when 

always gets his Trait total first (including 
making a melee attack along with a Wild 

spending any Bennies, see page 89), and 
Die. Only two of his dice can cause hits since 

must get at least a basic success (TN 4) or he 
the Wild Die can only replace a die, not add 

fails. The defender rolls next and must meet 
another attack. 

or exceed the first character's result or the 
attacker wins. 

The winner also uses his opponent's total 
All Trait and damage rolls in Savage Worlds 

for purposes of determining raise effects. 
are open-ended. That means that when you 
roll the highest number possible on a die (a CRITICAL FAILURES 
6onad6, an 8 ona d§, and so on), you get to 

A Critical Failure occurs when a Wild Card 
roll that die again and add it to the total. This 

rolls a 1 on both the skill die and Wild Die of 
is called an “Ace.” Any modifiers to the die 

a Trait roll. The attempt automatically fails 
roll should be tacked on after adding up an 

and something bad happens —a weapon 
Aced roll. 

is dropped or gets stuck, the attack hits a 
Example: Red attempts to leap a dangerous ice friend, the vehicle crashes, spells misfire (see 
chasm. She’s a Wild Card with a d8 in Athletics, Backlash, page 150), and so on. 
so she rolls a d8 and a d6 and takes the highest Critical Failures cannot be rerolled, even 
result. In this case, both dice Ace (8 on the d8 with Bennies (see the next page). 
and 6 on the d6). She rolls the d8 again and gets 

Extras and Critical Failures: If an Extra 
a 4 for a total of 12. She rolls the d6 again and 

rolls a 1 on a Trait check and it’s important 
gets another 6, followed by a 2 — that’s a total of 

to know if it’s a Critical Failure, such as when 
14. Red leaps the chasm with ease. . this time! 

casting a spell, roll a d6. On a 1, it’s a Critical 
Failure. Otherwise it’s just a normal failure. 
Multiple Dice: Some abilities allow 

Sometimes it’s important to know just how 
characters to roll multiple Trait dice, such as 

successful a Trait roll was. Every 4 points over 
the Frenzy Edge or firing a weapon with a 

the Target Number is called a “raise.” If your 
Rate of Fire higher than 1. A Critical Failure 

hero needs a 4 to shoot an opponent and rolls 
with multiple dice occurs when more than 

an 11, he hits with one raise (and would have 
half the die results are a natural 1. If the 

two raises with a roll of 12). Figure raises after 
character is a Wild Card, the Wild Die must 

adjusting for any modifiers. 
bea 1as well. 

A single raise always provides an additional 
effect of some sort, such as bonus damage Example: Gabe fires the auto-cannon of a high- 
when attacking or a benefit determined by tech hovercraft. It has a Rate of Fire of 3 so he 
the GM for other rolls. rolls three Shooting dice and one Wild Die. If 

three or more of the dice come up 1s, including 
the Wild Die, it’s a Critical Failure. 

88 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



UNSKILLED ATTEMPTS 
If a character doesn’t have a skill for an action 
he’s attempting, he rolls a d4 for his skill die Every now and then, dice rolls may not work 
(and a Wild Die if a Wild Card) and subtracts inyour favor. That's why Savage Worlds gives 
2 from the total. players a little control over their hero's fate. 
The GM may decide certain tasks cannot 

be attempted unskilled, such as performing PLAVER GHARAGTER BENNIES 
complex surgery or flying a commercial jet. Players start each game session with three 

“Bennies” (American slang for “benefits”), 
represented by poker chips, gaming stones, 

Some Edges or abilities allow a character to the official Bennies we make for all of our 
reroll Traits (as long as they're not a Critical games, or other tokens that signify a little bit 
Failure). To do so, roll all the dice again and of good luck or fate. 
get a new total. You may keep any of the totals Bennies are discarded at the end of each 
generated, so rerolls never make things worse session — use them or lose them! 
unless you roll a Critical Failure. This ends all Bennies are awarded in two ways: 
rerolls immediately and becomes the result 

® AWARDS: The Game Master should occa- 
of the attempt — that’s the risk one takes in 

sionally reward players for clever actions, 
pushing the limits! 

roleplaying their character (especially any 
Multiple rerolls are allowed from different Hindrances), or a great feat of heroism. 

Edges, Bennies, or other abilities. 
She can also award players a Benny for 

GROUP ROLLS telling a great story in character, delivering 
a fantastic line that makes everyone laugh, 

When you want to make a Trait roll for a 
or creating an emotional moment. 

group of Extras with like Traits, roll one Trait 
die as usual along with a Wild Die and treat = JOKER'S WILD: When a player character 
this as the group's result. This gives a decent draws a Joker during combat, all player 
average without making rolls for every characters receive a Benny! 

individual. 

Example: A group of soldiers attempts to slip Game Masters get Bennies too. At the start of 
through Gabe’s sensors. The GM rolls their each session, the GM gets one Benny for each 
Stealth die (a d6) and a Wild Die and takes the player character. These may be used for any 
best of the two as the soldiers” total. of his characters (including non-Wild Cards!) 

throughout the course of the game. 
Each of the GM's Wild Cards has two 

Bennies (plus any from Edges such as Luck) 
when they appear in the game. They can use 
these or any of the Bennies in the common 
pool as the GM wishes, but can’t share them 
without an Edge or ability that allows it. 
Heroes get Bennies when they do some- 

thing clever, roleplay, or are affected by 
their Hindrances in a scene. The GM doesn’t 
reward “herself” when roleplaying her 
villains, but her characters do benefit from 
drawing Jokers in combat: 
= JOKER'S WILD: Anytime the villains draw 
a Joker, put one Benny in their general pool 
and give another to each enemy Wild Card. 



USING BENNIES like and take their choice of all their draws. 

Bennies may be spent at any appropriate time Edges like Quick or Level Headed do not 
and don’tincur any sort of penalty. They may apply to these additional cards drawn with 
only be used on your own character. Bennies. This continues until everyone 

(including the GM) passes. Then the round 
Here are the ways characters can use their 

begins and no further cards may be drawn. 
Bennies. 

= REROLL DAMAGE: You may spend a Benny 
= REROLL A TRAIT: Bennies grant a hero a 

to reroll damage. Include any additional 
reroll on any Trait, and best of all, you get di h fed £ : th 
to keep the best total from all your rolls. The Yo Yon mag have gemedtora alse on Sg 
only exception is a Critical Failure, which aitpci roll. 1 
ends the attempt and must be accepted. ™ REGAIN POWER POINTS:A character with 
Such is the price of tempting fate! an Arcane Background can spend a Benny 

» RECOVER FROM SHAKEN: This is instant tO "682i 5 Power Points (Power Points and 
: their use are explained on page 147.) 

and may be done at any time, even 
interrupting another's actions if desired. = INFLUENCE THE STORY: This one is entirely 

= SOAK ROLLS: Bennies can also be used to ney Whe may How 
prevent Wounds or recover from being y p y 

an additional clue if you're stuck, come up 
yy Rolls on page 9 for with some mundane but needed item, or 

push a nonplayer character into being a bit 
= DRAW A NEW ACTION CARD: When the more agreeable. 
game is in rounds, a character can spend a 
Benny to get a new Action Card (see page “gl r THE BENNIES Aol! 
91). This occurs after all cards are dealt Daves TEND TO SUPRISE Hou 
and Edges or Hindrances like Quick, Level WHEN THEY HAVEA LITTLE MOT2E 
Headed, or Hesitant are resolved. Then FAM 
players or the GM may spend Bennies for coNTROL OVETZ- HE id 
an additional card as many times as they Tae 6M 

> a J 

“It takes a few games to figure out how many Bennies you should award players during a 
session. In general, we recommend you be fairly free with them, especially early in the game. 
If someone makes everyone laugh (and isn’t distracting the flow of the game), toss her a 
Benny. When someone roleplays a Hindrance, reward her. When someone does something 
clever or heroic or imaginative, acknowledge it with a Benny. 
Some GMs worry the game will become too easy if Bennies are too common, but we find 

the opposite is true. When Bennies are plentiful, players often spend them on trivial things 
that are important to them. Maybe the thief really wants to pick the lock on a chest. There's | 
nothing particularly valuable inside and the player probably knows it, but he’s the thiefand 
wants to prove himself to the rest of the party. 
When Bennies are scarce, however, players tend to save them for injuries, death, or taking 

out the big bads. That's fine, but takes away from the fun and heroics that got them to this 
point. Savage Worlds is about big action and players should be encouraged to take chances. 
The “currency” of these chances are those Bennies. 
Veteran Savage Worlds GMs might also notice Bennies tend to flow fairly fast early on 

in a session. The group is settling in, laughing, and are rewarded for roleplaying their 
Hindrances the first time or two. In the mid-to-late game, Bennies tend to be spent faster 
than they're gained. That's a fantastic pace. It gives the heroes opportunities to do big things 
in the early and mid-game then forces some resource management for the final showdown. 
If you find yourself being stingy, go the other way the next time you run and see how it 

affects your group. Then you'll know what's right for you and your friends. p 

Py 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



® TURN: A character's “turn” occurs when his 
Action Card comes up in the countdown. A 
hero with the Six of Diamonds, for example, 
takes his turn when that card comes up in 

Whether theyre the blood-soaked plains of the round. 
Mars or the corpse-strewn battlefields of the 

= ACTION: A single attack, skill use, etc. See 
distant pa—sthetse are Savage Worlds and 

page 92 for a more complete description. 
they are often violent. We recommend using 

Characters may perform multiple actions 
miniatures or markers of some sort so players 

on their turn (see Multi-Actions on page 
understand their surroundings and can use 

103). 
the terrain to their advantage. If miniatures 
aren't your thing, see the sidebar on page 97. 
Distance: Because the game assumes you AGTICN GARDS (INITIATIVE) 

are using terrain or a battlemat and standard The action in Savage Worlds is fast and 
28mm miniatures, movement and weapon furious. To help the Game Master keep track 
ranges are listed in inches. To translate that of who goes in what order and add a little 
to regular distance, one inch is equal to randomness to the game, we use a single deck 
two yards. of playing cards with both Jokers left in to 

If you're using miniatures and need to determine everyone's initiative order. We call 
accommodate a larger battlefield, simply set these “Action Cards.” 
each inch as five or 10 yards, for example, The GM can deal cards face up or face down 
and adjust movement rates and the like as she sees fit. She might also deal the players’ 
appropriately. cards face up and the villains face down to 
Time: When a fight breaks out, game time increase the players’ tension and uncertainty! 

breaks down into rounds of about six seconds At the start of each round: 
each. Ten rounds, then, equals one minute. * Deal each Wild Card a single Action Card 
® ROUND: A “round” is an entire countdown (plus any extra cards for Edges). Allies 
of Action Cards, from the Ace to the Deuce under a player's control act on his Action 
(Two). Card. 



* Extras, such as all zombies, all wolves, and FREE AGTIONS 
so on, should usually share an Action Card Speaking a short sentence or two, moving 
so they act at the same time. This makes them up to the character's Pace, falling prone, or 
much easier to manage. She can also group dropping an item are all free actions. A hero 
Wild Cards with their minions if she wants. can generally perform several free actions 
The goal is to do whatever makes running on her turn simultaneously (speaking and 
the battle as quick and easy as possible. dropping an item while walking, for example). 
Shuffle: Shuffle the deck after any round in The GM must decide how much is too much. 

which a Joker was dealt. Some free actions occur automatically at 
Large Groups: In very large groups or time- the beginning of a character's turn and may 

sensitive games, the Game Master can deal only be tried once, such as recovering from 
a single card per side (heroes and villains). being Shaken or Stunned. 
On the heroes’ turn, simply start at one end Free actions that are “reactions,” such 
of the group and work quickly around. This as resisting opposed rolls or powers, are 
speeds things up dramatically if that's more unlimited and occur each time the situation 
important than varying initiative order. If presents itself. 
one or more characters have Level Headed 
or Quick, let that apply to the draw (but 
only once). MOVEMENT 

Characters can move a number of tabletop 
inches equal to their Pace each turn. 

Once the cards are dealt, the Game Master Each inch of movement spent climbing, 
starts the round by counting down from Ace crawling, or swimming uses 2" of Pace. 
down to Two, with each group resolving its 

Running:A hero can “run” as a free action 
actions when its card comes up. 

once per turn, increasing her Pace for the 
Ties: Ties are resolved by suit order: Spades round by her Running die (a d6 by default) at 

A are first, then Hearts ¥, Diamonds #, and the cost of a —2 penalty to all other actions that 
Clubs ok. That's reverse alphabetical order as turn. Running dice never Ace. (The Running 
used in many common card games. die is random to account for nuances of terrain 
® JOKERS: Characters (or groups) with a Joker not depicted on the tabletop and for the “risk 
act whenever they want in the round, even to reward” decision players must make.) 
interrupting another's action. They also add Out of combat situations, a character 
+2 to all Trait and damage rolls this round! can move twice the sum of her full Pace + 

maximum running die for a number of 

AGTIONS minutes equal to half her Vigor die type. Thus 
a Fleet-Footed character with Vigor dé can 

Characters perform “actions” when their 
sprint at a Pace of 32 for three minutes. 

Action Card comes up each round. A 
character can move (see Movement, below) Difficult Ground: Each inch a hero walks 

and perform one regular action at any point or runs over rough terrain such as thick forest, 

in their movement, attacking, casting a spell, up or down a steep incline, slippery ice, etc., 
and so on, without penalty. count as 2" of her Pace. Crawling is unaffected 

by Difficult Ground. 
Characters can choose from a multitude 

of actions on their turn. Common actions Hazards: If the GM feels movement is 
include Supporting allies, Testing foes, hazardous for some reason— climbing 
using a power, or attacking with Fighting or under duress, swimming a fast-moving 
Shooting. See Multi-Actions on page 103 to river, walking a tightrope — she can require 
perform more than one action per turn. an Athletics roll to move. Success means she 

continues on normally. With a Critical Failure 
More complex actions like lighting a torch 

the character takes Fatigue from Bumps & 
or digging through a backpack for a small 

Bruises (page 125), falls if climbing or in a 
item might require a set or random amount 

precarious position (Falling, page 127), or 
of time (such as 1d6 rounds — GM's call). 

drowns if swimming (Drowning, page 126). 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



OTHER MOVEMENT ISSUES Extreme Range: Extreme Range is up to 4 x 

® JUMPING: Characters can jump 1” (two a weapon's Long Range. Firing at such a great 
yards) horizontally, or 0.5" vertically as a distance requires the Aim option (page 97). 
free action. Double these numbers if the When used in this way, Aim doesn’t reduce 

hero can run at least 2” (four yards) prior to any penalties — it simply allows the character 
the jump. If the hero chooses, she may make to fire at such a great distance. The penalty is 
an Athletics roll as an action to increase her -8, or —6 with a scope (page 68). 
horizontal distance by 1” (2" with a raise), Characters may not throw weapons at 
or half that vertically. Jumping does not Extreme Range. 
allow a character to exceed her total Pace Rate of Fire: Rate of Fire is how many 
for the turn. shots (Shooting dice) a ranged weapon can 

um PRONE: A character may fall prone as a fire in one action. A pistol with a RoF of 
free action during her turn. She may crawl 1, for example, can fire one shot per action. 
while prone. Standing is a free action but A machine gun with a Rate of Fire of 3 can 
reduces total Pace for the tum by 2. fire three shots per action (10 actual bullets, 

see below). 

ATTAGKS For weapons with a Rate of Fire of 2 or 
higher, declare how many shots you're 

The basics of fast, furious combat are 
putting into each possible target. Then roll 

discussed below. Many additional options 
that number of Shooting dice and assign 

and situations are covered under Situational 
them in whatever order you like to the targets 

Rules, starting on page 97. 
you declared. 

MELEE ATTACKS Wild Cards roll their Shooting dice plus a 
The Target Number to hit an opponent is Wild Die, which can be assigned wherever 
equal to the opponent’s Parry score (2 plus they like after seeing the result of the roll. 
half his Fighting die type; 2 if he has no They still can’t hit with more shots than the 
Fighting skill). weapon's Rate of Fire, however. 

A Rate of Fire higher than 1 is an abstract 
RANGED ATTAGKS value where each “shot” is actually a number 
The Shooting skill covers everything from of bullets. If you're tracking bullets, use the 
bows to pistols to rocket launchers and fixed table below and whatever Rate of Fire the 
machine guns. Throwing grenades, knives, character actually fires in an action, not the 
spears, or other thrown projectiles uses the weapon's maximum. 
Athletics skill. 
All ranged weapons have a Range statistic BULLETS PER RATE OF FIRE 

written like this: 5/10/20, or Short/Medium/ RATE OF FIRE BULLETS FIRED 
Long Range. 1 1 
The base Target Number to hit something 2 5 

at Short Range is 4. Firing at longer ranges 3 10 
inflicts the penalties listed below. 

4 20 
RANGE PENALTIES 5 40 
RANGE MODIFIER 6 50 
Short — 

Recoil: Firing more than one shot in one 
Medium -2 action from a weapon subtracts 2 from 
Long —4 the attacker's Shooting rolls (see Recoil, 

page 105). 
Extreme (see notes) -8 

Unless a weapon says otherwise, a shooter 
can fire less shots than his weapon's maximum 
Rate of Fire. 



DAMAGE APPLYING DAMAGE 
If the damage roll is less than the target's 

After a successful melee or ranged hit, the Toughness, the victim is beaten up a bit 
attacker rolls damage. Ranged weapons do but there's no game effect. If the damage is 
fixed damage as listed in the Gear section. equal to or greater than his Toughness, he’s 
Most pistols, for example, cause 2d6 damage. Shaken. Each raise on the damage roll also 
Hand weapons cause damage equal to inflicts a Wound: 

the attacker's Strength die plus a second die, ® SUCCESS: The character is Shaken. If he 
which depends on the weapon. A barbarian was already Shaken and the second result 
with a d12 Strength and a long sword (d8 is from physical damage of some kind (not 
damage) rolls d12 + d8 damage. a Test that results in Shaken, for example), 

Even though Strength is used to determine he remains Shaken and takes a Wound. 

melee damage, this isn’t a Trait roll so Wild ® RAISE: The character suffers a Wound for 
Cards don’t add a Wild Die to the roll. every raise on the damage roll, and isShaken. 
All damage rolls can Ace. 
Unarmed Damage: An unarmed combatant DAMAGE EFFECTS 

rolls only his Strength die unless he has an Damage can result in three effects: Shaken, 
Edge like Brawler (page 41) or Martial Wounds, and Incapacitation. 
Artist (page 43) that grants him a damage die. 

BONUS DAMAGE Shaken characters are nicked, bruised, or 
Well-placed attacks are more likely to hit vital otherwise rattled. They may only take free 
areas, and so do more damage. If your hero actions, such as moving (including running). 
gets a raise on his attack roll (regardless of At the start of their turn, Shaken characters 
how many raises), he adds +1d6 to the final must attempt to recover from being Shaken 
total. Bonus dice can also Ace! by making a Spirit roll. This is a free action. 
Bonus damage applies to all attacks, ® FAILURE: The character remains Shaken. 

including spells and area effect weapons. She can only perform free actions. 
® SUCCESS: The character is no longer Shaken 
and may act normally. 

MORE ON SHAKEN 
Shaken and Wounds can be a little confusing to new players. Here's a table that might help. 

DAMAGE VICTIM IS UNSHAKEN VICTIM IS ALREADY SHAKEN 

Success (0-3 points of 5 
damage over Toughness) Shaken 1 Wound and remains Shaken 

d 1 Baise (4-7 points 1 Wound and Shaken 1 Wound and remains Shaken 
k amage over Toughness) 

i 2 Raises (8-11 points of % 
damage over Toughness) 2 Wounds and Shaken 2 Wounds and remains Shaken 

3 Raises (1218 points of 3 Wounds and Shaken 3 Wounds and remains Shaken 
damage over Toughness) 

EXAMPLES: 
* Red takes a Wound. She's also Shaken. 
* Red is Shaken, then takes a Wound. She has one Wound and remains Shaken. 
e Red is already Shaken, then Shaken again (without a Wound). She now has one Wound 
and remains Shaken. 

* Red has two Wounds and is Shaken. She takes another Wound, so she has three Wounds 
and remains Shaken. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



INJURY TABLE 
2D6 WOUND 

Unmentionables: If the injury is permanent, reproduction is out of the question without 
miracle surgery or magic. There is no other effect from this result. 

3-4 Am: The victim can no longer use his left or right arm (rolled randomly if not targeted). 

Guts: Your hero catches one in the core. Roll 1d6: 
59 1-2 Broken: Agility reduced a die type (minimum d4). “iw 

3-4 Battered: Vigor reduced a die type (minimum d4). 
5-6 Busted: Strength reduced a die type (minimum d4). 

10-11 Leg: Gain the Slow Hindrance (Minor), or Major if already Slow or injured in either leg. 

Head: A grievous injury to the head. Roll 1d6: 
1-3 Hideous Scar: Your hero now has the Ugly (Major) Hindrance. i 

12 4-5 Blinded: An eye is damaged. Gain the One Eye Hindrance (or the Blind Hindrance if 
he only had one good eye). 

6 Brain Damage: Massive trauma to the head. Smarts reduced one die type (min d4). 

4 e—n em————— 
i, - eit 

Spending Bennies: A player may spend ® CRITICAL FAILURE: The character dies. 
a Benny at any time to remove her Shaken = FAILURE: Roll on the Injury Table. The 
status (even when it's not her turn). Injury is permanent and the character is 

Bleeding Out, see below. 

® SUCCESS: Roll on the Injury Table. The 
Every raise on the damage roll inflicts a 

Injury goes away when all Wounds are 
Wound. Extras are Incapacitated if they take a 

healed. 
single Wound (and aren’t Resilient, see page 
178). They're dead, injured, or otherwise out = RAISE: Roll on the Injury Table. The Injury 
of the fight. goes away in 24 hours, or when all Wounds 

are healed (whichever is sooner). 
Wild Cards can take three Wounds and still 

function (more with certain Edges or abilities). Characters cannot take actions and mighbte 
Further damage doesn’t cause additional unconscious (GM's call). The victim makes a 

Wounds but Incapacitates them instead. Vigor roll each day thereafter and is no longer 
Incapacitated (or unconscious) if successful. 

Wound Penalties: Each Wound a character 
They may also heal Wounds during this time 

suffers causes a —1 cumulative penalty to his 
(see Natural Healing on page 96). 

Pace (minimum of 1") and all Trait rolls — up 
to a maximum penalty of -3. Bleeding Out: The injured character is 

dying and must make a Vigor roll at the 
Timing: Characters sometimes take multi- 

start of his turn. Failure means he perishes. 
ple hits on the same Action Card. Resolve each 

With success he survives but must roll again 
damage roll separately and completely before 

next turn (or every minute if not in combat). 
moving on to the next (including any Soak rolls). 

With a raise, he stabilizes and no further rolls 

INGAPAGITATION are required. 

Incapacitated characters may not perform Other characters may stop a victim's 
actions but are still dealt Action Cards for bleeding by making a Healing roll (minus 
the remainder of the encounter in case they the patient's Wound penalties as usual). This 
recover or must roll for other effects such as is an action, and if successful the patient is 

Bleeding Out (below). Edges or Hindrances stabilized. 

that affect card draws, such as Quick, Level The healing power can also stabilize 
Headed, or Hesitant are ignored when the Wounds, as can a “natural” healing roll by a 
hero is Incapacitated. being with regeneration of some sort. 

If Incapacitated by damage or injury, he Incapacitation from Fatigue: See page 100. 
must make an immediate Vigor roll: 



or another's injuries suffers from both effects 
SOAK ROLLS (his Wounds plus the Wound penalty to the 
After rolling damage but before applying Healing roll). 
wounds, a character may spend a Benny to The Golden Hour: A character may only 
make a “Soak” roll. This is a Vigor check, with attempt to heal Wounds on a patient once 
each success and raise reducing the number within the hour they were sustained. Failing 
of Wounds suffered from that attack by one. the roll means the healer isn’t able to treat 

If the character Soaks all of the Wounds those particular injuries. A different character 
from an attack, he removes his Shaken may attempt a Healing roll on the same 
condition too (even from a previous source). patient, however. 
Don’t count the Wound modifiers he’s about Once the Wounds are over an hour old, 
to suffer when making this roll — that hasn't only natural healing or the healing power 
happened yet. (using greater healing) can heal Wounds. 
Characters can’t Soak more than once per Bleeding Out: The Healing skill can also 

attack, but may spend Bennies as usual to be used to stabilize someone who's Bleeding 
reroll the Vigor check if they aren't satisfied Out (page 95). Each attempt is an action, 
with the results. and if successful the victim is stabilized. 
Shaken:A  character can also spend a Benny Incapacitation: Healing at least one Wound 

to immediately eliminate a Shaken condition. on an Incapacitated patient removes that 
This can be done at any time. state (and restores consciousness if he was 

knocked out). 

| HEALING NATURAL HEALING 
pC NE — 

Tmt Wounded characters make a Vigor roll every 
The Healing skill is used to remove Wounds. five days. Success recovers one Wound, and 
Each attempt requires 10 minutes per wound a raise recovers two. 
level of the patient. Subtract 1 from Healing 

A Critical Failure increases the victim's 
rolls without a basic First Aid kit or similar 

Wound level by one—  either from infection, 
supplies. 

blood loss, or aggravating the injuries. If this 
A success removes one Wound, and a raise causes Incapacitation, don’t use the usual 

removes two. Failure means no Wounds rules for taking damage. Instead, the victim 
are removed. A Critical Failure increases the lapses in and out of consciousness and makes 
victim's Wound level by one. a Vigor roll every 12 hours. If the roll is failed, 
Wound Penalties: A healer subtracts his he expires. Success means he must roll again 

patient's Wound levels from his skill roll. A 12 hours later. With a raise he stabilizes and 
Wounded character trying to heal his own wakes. Allies may also attempt to stabilize the 

hero as explained under Bleeding Out, above. 

THE GOLDEN HOUR Support: Characters with Healing or 
Survival skills can make Support rolls to 

Patients who survive their initial trauma help allies when they make Vigor rolls to heal, 
have about an hour to survive most life- stabilize, or recover from any other ill effects. 
threatening injuries. If they receive medical Support rolls do not subtract the victim's 
attention during that time, they can generally Wounds from their total. 
be saved. The longer the wait, however, 
the more likely the Wounds are to be fatal. AFTERMATH & EXTRAS 
In Savage Worlds, we extend this concept 

If it's important to know what happens 
to healing in general. Besides reflecting the 

to Extras who were Incapacitated during 
real-world concept, it also provides good a fight, make a Vigor roll for each. Those 
game balance and drama as the party has 

who succeed survive and must be cared for, 
to decide whether to press on despite 

taken prisoner, or released. This can present 
their injuries. interesting challenges for your heroes in the 
te aftermath of savage combat! 

hr 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



belch up noxious gas, the flamethrower 

SITUATIONAL RULES malfunctioned, etc. 

To attack with a blast template, the player 
places the template and rolls Shooting or 

The core Savage Worlds rules are very simple — 
Athletics (for thrown weapons or breath 

roll a skill die (and a Wild Die if a Wild Card). 
attacks). If the attack is successful, the blast 

If the result is 4 or higher after all modifiers, 
lands where desired. See Deviation, below 

you're successful. 
for failure. 

In the following section are some of the 
Any target even partially beneath either 

more elaborate options and maneuvers 
type of template is affected. If the effect 

characters can attempt. 
causes damage, roll for each victim separately. 
Attacks that hit with a raise cause bonus 

AIM damage as usual. 
Shooting rolls assume a character is moving 
about, dodging attacks, and keeping an eye DEVIATION 
on the chaos around her. If she focuses her If an attack with a Cone Template fails, it goes 
attention and aims, however, she can make a over the targets’ heads, hits the ground, or 

much more accurate shot. simply falters for some reason. The GM may 
still decide the attack affects the area around 

If a character spends her entire turn Aiming 
it— perhaps a flamethrower sets a room on 

a ranged weapon at a particular target and 
fire or a gas canister spews a cloud of gas — 

takes no other actions, she can ignore up to 
but there's no game effect on characters or 

4 points of Range, Cover, Called Shot, Scale, 
other targets this time. 

or Speed penalties. Her attack must be used 
on the first action of her next turn or the If a blast template misses, it deviates 1d6" 
bonus is lost. for thrown weapons (such as grenades) and 

2d6” for fired projectiles. Multiply by 2 if the 
The shooter must be “stationary” to Aim. 

attack was made at Medium Range, 3 if Long, 
She can’t walk, run, ride a horse, or otherwise 

and 4 for Extreme. 
move under her own power. She could Aim 
from a vehicle traveling over or through a Next roll a d12 and read it like a clock 
smooth surface, or one using the Hold Steady facing to determine the direction the missile 
Chase maneuver (see page 116). deviates. A weapon can never deviate more 

AREA EFFECT ATTAGKS * TEMPLATES WITHOUT MINIATURES | 
Grenades, spell effects, breath weapons, and | 
other attacks that cover a large area are “area Use the measurements below when you 

need to figure out how many enemies a 
effect attacks.” The most common are Small, 

template might affect. | 
Medium, and Large Blast Templates, and 
the Cone Template. There are copies you The GM can also use the Targets Affected | 
can print out on our website and we make column to determine how many enemies | 
durable acrylic versions as well. are hit in narrative situations, modifying | 

the results if the targets are more spread 
Cone templates are placed with the small 

out (highly trained agents) or bunched up 
end emanating from the attacker and fired 

(a horde of zombies). 
with the Shooting skill (or Athletics for breath 
weapons and other natural attacks). TARGETS 

A basic success means the cone stays TEMPLATE DIAMETER AFFECTED 

where the user intended, and a raise causes Small dyards | 2 
additional damage as usual. Those beneath Medium 8 yards 3 
the template are hit, or may Evade (page 
100), if the attack allows it. Large 12 yards 4 

Colic 18-yard-long 3 
Failure means the attack didn’t occur 

cone 
for some reas—othne creature failed to 



than half the distance to the original target 
(that keeps it from going behind the thrower). BREAKING THINGS 

Occasionally a character may want to break 
GOVER & AREA EFFECT ATTACKS a solid object, such as a weapon, lock, or 
Solid obstacles like trees or brick walls protect door. Use the wielder’s Parry if held, or 2 
against area effect attacks if they're between if it’s motionless. If a damage roll equals or 
the origin of the blast and the GM reasonably exceeds the object's Hardness, it's broken, 
thinks they'd apply. Reduce the damage by bent, shattered, or otherwise ruined. The GM 
the amount listed on the Cover Bonus table decides the exact effect. 
under Cover & Obstacles, page 99. 

Most anything can be broken given enough 
time and effort, so use this system only when 

BOUND & ENTANGLED attempting to break things in a hurry (such as 
Grappling and powers like entangle cause during combat rounds). 
characters to be Bound and Entangled. Here's 
what each of those states means and how to OBJECT HARDNESS 
break free from them. HARDNESS OBJECT 

® ENTANGLED: The victim can’t move and is 8 Door, Light 
Distracted as long as he remains so. 10 Door, Heavy 

® BOUND: The victim may not move, is 8 Lock 
Distracted and Vulnerable as long as he 

9 Firearm (pistol or rifle) 
remains Bound, and cannot make physical 
actions other than trying to break free. 12 Handcuffs 

Breaking free is an action. With success, 10 Knife, Sword 

an Entangled hero is free of one particular 10 Medieval Shield® 
entanglement or grappler. A Bound character 12 Modern Shield* 
improves to Entangled with a success; with 

4 Rope 
a raise, he’s free. See below for more details: 

Breaking Free from a Foe: Use the Grappling *A character must specifically state he's trying to 
rules (page 101) in reverse to break free— break a shield to do so—don’t check every time 
the victim initiates an opposed Athletics roll the shield-bearer is hit. 
with whoever’s holding him (either may roll No Bonus Damage or Aces: Attacks against 
Strength at -2 instead to maintain or break solid objects don’t get bonus damage from 
free of the hold). If the victim's successful, raises, and damage rolls don’t Ace. Unlike a 
she improves her status one level, or two person or complex device like a computer or 
with a raise. a vehicle, an attack can’t hit a “vital” area on 
A Shaken grappler maintains her hold. a lock or a door and thus do more damage. 

Stunned grapplers let go immediately. Damage Types: Certain types of attacks 
Breaking Free from a Device: Escaping a can’t break certain types of objects. A club 

web, net, or the entangle power is a Strength can’t cut a rope, for example, and a single 
—2 roll or Athletics roll (victim's choice) minus bullet won't destroy a door. Use common 
any penalties noted for the entanglement. sense when determining whether or not 
The sticky web of a giant spider, for example, a particular type of weapon can destroy 
might note that escape attempts are made an object. 
at -2 or more. This is an action, and success See Cover & Obstacles to attack through 
works just like breaking free from a foe barriers. 
(explained above). 

Characters and allies may also destroy the CALLED SHOTS 
entanglement (see Breaking Things, page 
98). Webs, ropes, nets, and the like are Sometimes a character might want to target 
generally Hardness 4 and must be cut with a particular body part to disarm a foe, put 
an edged weapon. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



down a ravening zombie with a head shot, or OBSTAGLES 
bypass an enemy's armor. Sometimes characters have sufficient power 
The modifier to the attack roll depends on to attack their foes through obstacles. (See 

the Scale of the target itself (not the creature Breaking Things to actually destroy intervening 
it’s part of). Use the Scale Modifiers table obstacles.) If a missed attack would have been 
on page 106 to determine any bonus or successful without the Cover modifier and 
penalty for the target's Scale. These modifiers the GM thinks the target is likely to be hit, the 
are already listed in parentheses below obstacle acts as Armor. 
for Normal scale creatures, along with any If the obstacle is a person or creature, 
specific game effects: subtract its Toughness from the attack. Use 
® HAND (-4): Target may be Disarmed, see the table below as a guide for other materials. 
page 100. 

= HEAD OR VITALS (-4): Hitting the head 
or vital organs of living creatures adds +4 OBSTACLE 

damage to the attacker's total. Heavy glass, thick leather, drywall, 

The penalty is —5 if attempting to target wooden shield, aluminum car door 

the face of someone wearing an open- +4 Sheet metal, steel car door 

faced helmet (thus bypassing the helmet’s +6 Oak door, cinder block wall 
Armor). +8 Brick wall 

® ITEM (?): Use the dimensions on the Scale Stone wall, bulletproof glass, tree 
table for items. Targeting something the 
size of a pistol, for example, is —4; a 3’ long 
sword is 2. 

® LIMBS (-2): Hitting a limb has no additional 
special effect since it's already accounted 
for by Wound and Pace penalties (see 
Wounds, page 95). 

= UNARMORED AREA (?): The attack targets 
the unprotected area of a target otherwise 
covered in Armor. The penalty depends on 
the Scale of the area. The eyeslit of a helmet 
is Tiny (=6), for example, while the flesh 
beneath the missing scale ofa Huge dragon 
might be Very Small (—4). 

GOVER & OBSTAGLES 
Melee and ranged attacks suffer a penalty 
when attempting to hit a target behind Cover, 
per the table below: 

Light Cover: 50% or less of the target 
32 is obscured. 

oy Medium Cover: 50-75% of the target 
is obscured, or target is prone. 

0 Heavy Cover: 25% or less of the 
target is visible. 

Near Total Cover: The target is in 
-8 Near Total Cover (such as an arrow 

slit). 



(such as a sniper attacking an unaware and 
stationary target). 

A character can choose to focus all her energy The Drop adds +4 to a character’s attack and 
and skill into defense against melee attacks damage rolls against that target for one action. 
with the Defend maneuver. This increases Knockout Blow: If a character takes enough 
her Parry by +4 and takes her entire turn — damage to be Shaken or worse from an 
she cannot perform Multi-Actions. She may attacker with The Drop on him, he must make 
move normally but may not run. a Vigor roll (at -2 if the attack was to the head) 

or be knocked unconscious. 

KO’ed characters stay that way for about 
| A character can try to make an opponent half an hour or until the GM decides it’s 
drop a weapon (or other object) or attempt to dramatically appropriate to wake up. Note 
damage it, by making a melee or ranged attack. that Knockout Blows come from any kind of 

damage, not just blows to the head! 
The attacker must first hit the object or the 

opponent's limb or hand (see Called Shots 
on page 98). EVASION 

If the attack hits the weapon, the attacker Some attacks are slow or require the user to 
rolls damage normally for an item (no raise “telegraph” their delivery, like flamethrowers 
effect or Aces, see Breaking Things, page or dragon's breath. Such attacks state they 
98). The defender must make a Strength may be “evaded.” If an attack doesn't say it 
roll equal to the damage or drop the item. can be evaded, it can’t — victims are simply 

If the attack is against the wielder and hitif the attack is successful and take damage. 
Shakes or Wounds him, the defender must If an attack can be evaded and the character 
make a Strength roll at —2 if it hit his limb, or is aware of it, he makes an Agility roll at —2. 
—4 if it hit his hand, plus any Wound penalties Those who are successful manage to avoid 
that result as usual. Failure means he drops the attack and take no damage. If this was an 
whatever item is in that hand. area effect attack, the GM should place the 

figure to the side or rear of the template as 

DISTRAGTED & VULNERABLE makes sense in the situation. 

Characters may be Distracted or made 
Vulnerable by Tests, powers, or creature FATIGUE 
effects. Both states last until the end of the Some hazards, stress, powers, or circum- 
character's next turn. If a hero becomes stances may cause Fatigue instead of damage. 
Distracted or Vulnerable during her current This represents mental stress or minor but 
turn, it lasts until the end of her next turn. lingering injuries that make a person less 
® DISTRACTED: The hero subtracts 2 from all effective. Fatigue stacks until the victim is 
Trait rolls until the end of his next turn. Incapacitated. 

= VULNERABLE: Actions and attacks against um FATIGUED: The victim subtracts 1 from 

the target are made at +2 until the end of his all Trait rolls. If he takes another level of 

next turn. This doesn’t stack with The Drop Fatigue, he’s Exhausted. 

(see below) — use only the highest. m EXHAUSTED: The victim subtracts 2 from 
all Trait rolls. If he takes another level of 

THE DROP Fatigue, he’s Incapacitated. 
= INCAPACITATED: The victim cannot perform 

Sometimes an attacker is able to catch a foe 
actions and may be unconscious (GM's call). 

off-guard and gets “The Drop” on him. The 
GM decides when this is in effect — usually REGOVERY 
it’s when the victim is bound or completely 

Unless otherwise specified by the source, 
unaware of an attack. The Drop usually 

Fatigue and Exhaustion improve one level per 
happens up close but the GM can also 

hour. Incapacitated characters are helpless 
allow it in other situations as she sees fit 

100 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



and may be unconscious (GM's call) for 2d6 
hours. If treatment is possible (food, water, 
etc., depending on the source of Fatigue), and Ganging up allows attackers to flank, exploit 
a Healing roll is made, the character improves openings, and generally harass a foe. Each 
to Exhausted. additional adjacent foe (who isn’t Stunned) 
Mixed Fatigue: If a hero suffers Fatigue adds +1 to all the attackers’ Fighting rolls, 

from different sources with different recovery up to a maximum of +4. If three goblins 
times, remove one level when the effect with attack a single hero, for example, each of the 
the shortest duration expires, then another three goblins add+2 to their Fighting rolls. 
level when the longest expires. Each ally adjacent to the defender cancels 

out one point of Gang Up bonus from 
HAZARDS an attacker adjacent to both. This means 
Fatigue from hunger, thirst, etc., sometimes troops in opposing lines, such as a medieval 
has different recovery conditions. See formation where each man has three adjacent 
Hazards, starting on page 125. foes and two adjacent allies, don’t get the 

bonus unless actually flanked. 
FINISHING MOVE 
A completely helpless victim may be GRAPPLING 
dispatched with a lethal weapon of some Grappling is an opposed roll between the 
sortas an action. This is automatic unless the attacker and defender’s Athletics. If the 
GM decides there's a special situation, such attacker wins, the foe is Entangled. With a 
as a particularly tough or naturally armored raise, he’s Bound. (Success on a foe who was 
victim, a chance for escape, and so on. already Entangled makes him Bound.) Bound 
The killer must usually dispatch his & Entangled are explained on page 98. 

foe up close and personal, but the GM If a foe is Bound, the grappler is also 
may occasionally let Finishing Moves be Vulnerable while maintaining his hold. 
performed at range if the situation warrants. 

The Gang Up bonus applies when grappling 
a defender, but other maneuvers don’t unless 

FIRING INTO MELEE the Game Master rules otherwise in a specific 
Occasionally heroes have to fire into the situation. 

middle of hand-to-hand fights. The trouble Size Matters: If there's a difference in 
is that even though we might see figures Scale between the attacker and defender, the 
standing perfectly still on the tabletop, in grappler subtracts the difference from his 
“reality,” they're circling each other, wrestling total (the defender does not). 
back and forth, and moving erratically. For Creatures may not generally grapple a foe 
that reason, firing into a tangle of people, more than two Sizes larger then themselves 
such as a melee, is quite dangerous. Use the unless they have exceptional reach or 
Innocent Bystander rules when this occurs Strength for their Size (GM's call). 
(see page 102). 

Example: A dragon (Huge +4) tries to pin a 

FREE ATTACKS half-folk thief (Normal). The difference between 
Huge and Normal Scales is 4, so the dragon 

Some Edges, such as Counterattack and First must subtract 4 from its Athletics roll. 
Strike, or options such as Withdrawing from If an ogre (Normal) tries to wrestle a great 
Melee, allow a character to make a free attack. white shark (Large +2), he must subtract 2 

Free attacks are a single attack unaltered from his roll. 
by other Edges or combat options. This is Crush: A grappler may harm someone he’s 
usually a Fighting or grappling attack, but Entangled or Bound by making an opposed 
could include Shooting if the attacker is Strength roll as an action on his turn. With 
armed with a pistol or other ranged weapon success, his attack does his Strength in 
that can fire in melee (see Ranged Weapons damage (gaining bonus damage for a raise 
in Melee, page 104). as normal). 



Characters with improvised weapons 
count as armed but subtract 2 from attack 

[72] A hero may choose to wait and see what rolls. Range, damage and Minimum Strength 
[=] 
pu happens by going on “Hold.” This allows her are determined by type: 
[+4 to resolve her turn later in the round if she ® LIGHT: Metal beer stein, fist-sized rock, 
(=) 
S wishes, and lasts until it’s used. If a character pistol (as a club). Range 3/6/12, Damage 

is on Hold when a new round begins, she’s Str+d4, Min Str d4. 
[#] 

not dealt a new Action Card but can go at any 
& = MEDIUM: Bowling ball, submachine gun 

point in the round she chooses. (Discard her (as a club), wooden chair. Range 2/4/8, 

= current card and mark her as “On Hold” with Damage Str+d6, Min. Str dé. 
0 a counter of some sort.) 

® HEAVY: Head-size rock, metal chair, duffel 
Shaken and Stunned: If a character is bag full of guns. Range 1/2/4, Damage 

Shaken or Stunned while on Hold, she Str+d8, Min. Str d8. 
immediately loses her Hold status and her 

The GM can adjust the damage down a level 
turn for the round. (Shaken or Stunned 

or two if the item is softer than the examples 
characters can’t go on Hold either.) 

above, like a duffel bag full of money. 
Interrupting Actions: If a character on Hold 

wants to interrupt an action (including a rival 
who was also on Hold), she and the opponent INNOGENT BYSTANDERS 
make opposed Athletics rolls. Whoever rolls When an attacker misses a Shooting or 
highest goes first. In the rare case of a tie, the Athletics (throwing) roll, it may sometimes be 
actions are simultaneous. important to see if any other targets in the line 

If the character interrupting fails, she loses of fire were hit. The GM should only use this 
her Hold status but gets a turn after the foe rule when it's dramatically appropriate — not 
finishes his. She may take whatever actions for every missed shot in a hail of gunfire. 
she wishes when her turn comes up — she’s Each skill die that’s a 1 hits a random victim 
not locked into whatever she was trying todo adjacent to or directly in the line of fire to the 
when she failed to interrupt. original target. Wild dice never hit innocent 

bystanders. 

ILLUMINATION A Wild Card must miss with his Wild 
Die for a RoF 1 weapon to hit an Innocent 

Darkness conceals details and makes it more 
Bystander (except for shotguns, see below). 

difficult to detect objects and targets. Subtract 
the following penalties from rolls affected by This means it's sometimes easier to hit an 

Illumination, such as attacks, Notice rolls, the adjacent victim than the original target. That 
use of powers, etc. may not be entirely realistic, but is simple, 

dramatic, and requires some care in tight 

IMPROVISED WEAPONS tactical situations. 

= ROF2 + ORSHOTGUN: Weapons that spray 
Heroes often fight with objects that aren’t bullets or buckshot are much more likely to 
intended for use as weapons. Torches, vases, hit others. Each skill die thatrollsa1ora2 
chairs, tankards, bottles, tools, and other hits a bystander. 
mundane items are frequently pressed into 
service in combat. 

ILLUMINATION PENALTIES 
PENALTY LIGHTING 

-2 Dim: Twilight, light fog, night with a full moon. 

Dark: Typical night conditions with some ambient light from stars, a clouded or partial 
-4 moon, emergency lights in an office building, a few flickering torches in a large space, etc. 

Targets aren't visible outside of 10". 

Pitch Darkness: Complete and total darkness (or the target is hidden or invisible). Powers 
-6 

that require sight may notbe possible. 

102 



have moved at least 6” or more in a relatively 
MOUNTED GOMBAT straight line toward his foe. 
Characters fighting from horseback (or other Setting Weapons:A weapon with a Reach 
strange beasts) have certain advantages and of 1 or greater can be “set” against a cavalry 
disadvantages in combat, as described below. attack. To do so, the attacker must be on Hold 

Mounts aren't dealt Action Cards — they and win an opposed Athletics roll to interrupt 
act with their riders. Animals may attack any as usual. Whoever has the most Reach adds 
threat to their front during their rider's action. +2 to his roll. 

Horsemanship: Characters who wish to The winner attacks first. If successful, he 

fight from horseback must use the lowest of adds the +4 charge bonus to his damage 
their Fighting or Riding skills. This makes it (whether he’s the rider or not). 
important for cavalrymen to actually be able 
to ride well! MULTI-AGTIONS 

Falling: If a character is Shaken, Stunned, Characters can perform up to three actions on 
or Wounded while mounted, or his mount their turn. Each additional action beyond the 
is Incapacitated, he must make a Riding roll. first inflicts a —2 penalty to all actions. Taking 
If he fails, he falls. If the mount was running two actions, for example, incurs a -2 penalty 
(GM's call), the rider suffers 2d4 damage (2d6 to both, and three actions is a —4 penalty. 
with a Critical Failure). 

Wild Cards get their Wild Die on each 
Missed Ranged Attacks: Mounts and action as usual. 

riders are affected by the Innocent Bystander 
All actions must be declared at the start 

rules. If a shot intended at a rider rolls a 1, it 
of the turn and before any dice are rolled. 

hits the horse instead. 
Penalties remain even if a later action doesn’t 

Wounded Mounts: When an animal is happen (usually because it was dependent on 
Shaken or Wounded, it rears or bucks. A rider an earlier success). 
must make a Riding roll to stay mounted, or 

Movement and Multiple Actions: A chara- 
falls as above. 

cter may perform multiple actions at different 
points in his movement. 

A rider on a charging horse adds +4 to his 
damage roll with a successful Fighting attack. 
To be considered charging, the rider must 



Off-hand weapons don’t add their Parry 
NATURAL WEAPONS bonus unless the hero is Ambidextrous 

Creatures with natural weapons such as (page 37). 

fangs, claws, or horns may attack with any or 
all of them using their Fighting skill. Damage 
is stated for character races and beasts in their 

Ranged attacks suffer a —4 penalty to hit prone 
various descriptions. 

characters from a range of 3" or greater (this 
Creatures with natural weapons are does not stack with Cover) and subtract four 

always considered armed. This means they points of damage from Area Effect attacks. 
aren't Unarmed Defenders and foes fighting 

If a prone defender is caught in melee, his 
with Two Weapons gain no advantage 

Parry is reduced by 2 and he must subtract 2 
against them (see page 108). Here are a few 

from his Fighting rolls. 
additional notes for each type of attack: 

Standing costs a character 2" of movement. 
u BITE: The creature may bite a target it's 
grappled (most attackers can only crush 
their prey, see Grappling, page 101). 

u CLAWS: +2 to Athletics (climbing) rolls on Sometimes characters may want to push a 
any rough or soft surface (not sheer steel, foe in hopes of knocking him out of position, 
glass, etc.). prone, or even into a deadly hazard. 

= HORNS: Add +4 damage at the end of one Pushing a foe is an opposed roll of Strength. 
Fighting action in which it Runs, moves If the attacker is successful he pushes the 
at least 5"(10 yards), and successfully hits foe back up to 1” (two yards). With a raise, 
with its horns. increase the distance to 2" (four yards). 

Double either distance if the attacker's Scale 

NONLETHAL DAMAGE is larger than the foe's. 
A character who's successfully Pushed must 

A character who wants to beat someone 
make an Athletics roll (at -2 if the attacker got 

up without killing them can choose to do 
a raise) or be knocked prone. 

nonlethal damage. This requires the attacker 
use only his fists or a blunt weapon of some Running; If the attacker ran at least 2" (four 
sort. Edged weapons may be used if they yards) before the Push, he adds +2 to his total. 
have a flat side, but this subtracts -1 from the Size Matters: Creatures may not generally 
attacker’s Fighting rolls. Push a foe more than two Sizes larger then 
Nonlethal damage causes Wounds as usual, themselves unless they have exceptional 

but if a character is rendered Incapacitated Strength for their Size (GM's call). 
he’s knocked out for 1d6 hours instead. Skill: The attacker or defender may roll 
Nonlethal Wounds are otherwise treated Athletics instead of Strength if they choose. 

exactly as lethal Wounds. This means it's Shields: Attackers and defenders add their 
much easier to render an Extra unconscious shield’s Parry bonus to their Strength (or 
than a Wild Card. This is intentional, and Athletics) rolls when pushing. 
should work well for most genres where 
heroes can take multiple punches before RANGED WEAPONS IN MELEE 
going down for the count, but most “mooks” 
go out with one or two good punches. Heroes may fire ranged weapons when 

engaged in melee with a few caveats: 

OFF-HAND ATTAGKS ¢ The attacker may only use a power or a one- 
handed ranged weapon (such as a firearm 

Characters are assumed to be right-handed no larger than a pistol) when in melee. He 
unless the player decides otherwise. Actions may not fire rifles or other “long arms.” The 
that require precise eye-hand coordination, TN is the defender’s Parry instead of Short 
such as Fighting or Shooting, suffer a -2 Range as he struggles, wrestles back and 
penalty when done solely with the off-hand. forth, etc. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



e If attacking a non-adjacent target with a so that it’s ready to fire (chambered, cocked, 
ranged attack while in melee, the attacker etc.) is an action. 
instantly becomes Vulnerable. Some weapons are slower to reload, like 

heavy crossbows or black powder weapons. 
READYVING WEAPONS They require a number of actions to reload, 

listed as “Reload X” in their description. 
Characters may “ready” up to two items 
per turn as a free action. Readying means Example: Gabe fires a heavy crossbow (Reload 
drawing, holstering, or otherwise moving 2) as part of a Multi-Action, using his other two 
an item into or out of a familiar and easy-to- actions that turn to reload. Since this is three 
reach location. actions, his Shooting roll is made at —4. On the 
Each additional item readied is an action, following round, he can fire again at no penalty. 

as is readying an item from a difficult Running & Reloading: Characters who 
location such as an ankle holster, off the floor run and load must make an Agility roll (at 
after being disarmed, or other extenuating the usual -2 penalty for running). Failure 
circumstances. means no progress toward reloading was 

made that action. 
RECOIL 
Unless it says otherwise in its description, SHOTGUNS 
firing at a Rate of Fire greater than 1 in one Shotguns fire a spread of metal “shot,” and so 
action causes Recoil, a -2 penalty to the do more damage at close range where more 
attacker’s Shooting rolls. A submachine gun of the shot hits the target. Because of this, 
with a Rate of Fire of 3, for example, causes shotguns add +2 to the user's Shooting rolls 
Recoil unless its user fires only a single shot. and cause 3d6 damage at Short Range, 2d6 at 

Recoil isn't cumulative between actions. If Medium, and 1d6 at Long. Shotguns may not 
a character fires three shots (RoF 3) on one be fired at Extreme Range. 
action and triggers the Recoil penalty, he Double Barrels: Some shotguns have two 
ignores it on a second action if he only fires barrels welded side-by-side. If an attacker 
a single shot. wants to fire both barrels at the same target, 

roll damage once and add +4. 
Slugs: Shotguns can also fire slugs. The 

Nocking an arrow or loading a stone in a attacker doesn’t get the +2 shotgun bonus 
sling are free actions that may be performed to his Shooting roll, but the damage is 2d10 
once per action. Reloading a crossbow bolt, regardless of Range (and they may be fired at 
clip, magazine, speed loader, or single bullet Extreme Range). Innocent Bystanders (page 

102) are hit only on a 1 (instead of 1 or 2). 



RELATIVE SPEED PENALTY 
SIZE & SCALE PENALTY  TARGET'S RELATIVE SPEED IS... 

[72] Characters and creatures have a Size ranging 
[=] =1 60 MPH+ 
pu from —4 for very small beings up to Size 20 
[4 =2 120 MPH+ 

and higher for massive behemoths. Specific 
o 
S creature Sizes are listed in their statistics, and 4 240 MPH+ 

explained on the Size Table on page 179. -6 Mach 1+ 
[2] 

& The Size Table lists seven different “Scales,” 8 Mach 2+ 
from Tiny to Gargantuan, and the Scale -10 Near Light Speed+ 

= Modifier that goes with each. 
0 * Multiply MPH by 1.5 to get Pace. 

When creatures of different Scales attack * Divide Pace by 1.5 to get MPH. 
each other, the smaller creature adds the 
difference between its Scale and its target to 
its attacks. A Tiny fairy (-6 Scale modifier), STUNNED 
for example, adds +10 to hurl a bolt at a Huge Stun guns, creature abilities, the stun power, 
dragon (+4). electrical hazards, or other shocks to the 

The larger creature subtracts the difference brain or nervous system make a character 
from its attacks. A Very Small eagle (4) essentially helpless until they manage to 
subtracts 2 from its Fighting totals when shake it off. 
attacking a Tiny fairy (=6). 

STUNNED GHARAGTERS 
SCALE MODIFIERS * Are Distracted (and remain so as long as 

they're Stunned) 
MODIFIER SCALE & EXAMPLES 

e Fall prone (or to their knees, GM's call) 
-6 Tiny: Armor joint, baseball, mouse e Can't move or take any actions 

Very Small: Human hand or head, * Don’t count toward the Gang Up bonus 
basketball, house cat * Are subject to the Drop 

= Small: Human limb, bobcat Recovery: At the start of a Stunned char- 
Normal: Human, motorcycle, bull, acter’s turn, he makes a Vigor roll. Success 
horse means he’s no longer Stunned but remains 

+2 Large: Hippo, most vehicles Distracted and is now Vulnerable (these fade 
+4 Huge: Dragon, whale at the end of his next turn). A raise on the 

Vigor roll removes all ill effects. 
+6 Gargantuan: Building, kaiju, ship 

GALLED SHOTS & TARGET SIZE SUPPORT 
Use the Scale of the target when making Sometimes characters may want to cooperate 
called shots against creatures, not their Scale. or help an ally with a task. If so, and the GM 
If a hero wants to blast the eye of a Huge robot decides it's possible, supporting characters 
destroying the city, for example, use the Scale roll the relevant skill (on their action if the 
of the eye, not the robot. If the eye is about game is in rounds) and declare which of their 
the size of a car, the hero adds +2 to his roll ally’s skills they're attempting to Support. 
because a car is Large, a +2 bonus. Success grants the ally +1 to one skill total 

Hitting the vital areas have extra effects this round, and a raise adds +2. A Critical 
listed under Called Shots (page 98). Failure on the support roll subtracts 2 from 

the lead’s total — sometimes extra hands just 
get in the way! 
Remove all Support bonuses at the end of 

Characters occasionally need to attack 
the recipient’s turn, whether he used them 

fast-moving targets. If the relative speed 
or not (perhaps by taking an action different 

between attacker and defender is 60 Miles 
than the one he was Supported for). 

per Hour (MPH) or more, apply the Relative 
Speed Penalty: 

106 



The maximum bonus from all Support rolls The advantage for a player in making a 
is +4. Strength checks are an exception and Support roll over a Test is to help an ally and 
have no maximum bonus since more muscle avoid a more difficult opposed roll for the 
can always manage more mass. Test (even though narratively it might seem 

Players and GMs should be creative when like it should be an opposed roll). 
making Support rolls. An adventurer with 
Survival, for example, might make a roll to SUPPRESSIVE FIRE 
find useful herbs for an ally attempting a 

Suppressive Fire turns a firearm or other 
Healing check, or a galactic explorer with 

rapid-firing weapon into an area effect attack. 
Science might calculate slingshot vectors that 

It trades accuracy for a hail of ammo to keep 
help a friend make a tricky Piloting roll. 

the enemies’ heads down. 
General encouragement (a Persuasion roll) 

A weapon must be able to fire at least 
such as “You can do it!” or “Check your six!” 

as rapidly as a revolver and can’t require 
are perfectly acceptable, but at the GM's 

reloading in between shots. 
discretion lose effectiveness if repeated. 

Suppressive Fire uses three times the usual 
Example: Gabe is the driver in a chase. Red number of bullets for its Rate of Fire (see page 
points out a shortcut by yelling, “Take the 93) and always incurs Recoil regardless of 
next left!” She rolls Common Knowledge and the weapon's original Rate of Fire (the Rock 
gets a raise. Gabe adds +2 to his next Driving and Roll! Edge, bipods, and tripods negate 
roll. Later on, Red is hit by a ricochet and is Recoil as usual). 
Shaken. Gabe yells, “Toughen up, cowgirl! 

To make the attack, the shooter places a 
This ain't your first rodeo!” and makes a 

Medium Blast Template on the tabletop and 
Persuasion roll. He gets a success and Red adds 

makes a Shooting roll (a single Shooting die 
+1 to her upcoming Spirit total to recover from 

regardless of Rate of Fire — RoF comes into 
being Shaken. 

Maximum Casualties, below.) Figure Range, 
Illumination, Recoil, etc., as usual, to the 

SUPPORT VS. TEST center of the template. 
The Support option can be used against an 

Next compare the total to each target in 
opponent narratively, but the only effect it 

the template and consider any modifiers 
can have is as detailed above. If a character 

that apply to each (Cover, the Dodge Edge, 
wants to “trip up” an ogre to help a friend 

the deflection power, etc.). Success means the 
make a Fighting roll against it, for example, 

target is Distracted, and a raise means he’s 
she can add +1 or +2 to his roll, but she doesn’t 

actually hit (no bonus damage is possible 
actually trip the ogre. It's not made prone, 

from Suppressive Fire). 
Distracted, Vulnerable, or Shaken as it might 
if she had used the Test option (page 108). 



Maximum Casualties: Every target under the most appropriate skill to roll for it. Tests 
the template can be Distracted, but it can only are resisted instinctively, so the “attacker's” 
cause damage to a number of targets equal skill roll is opposed by the attribute it’s 
to the weapon's Rate of Fire. The attacker linked to. Tripping someone is an Athletics 
chooses which targets are hit among his roll versus Agility since that’s what Athletics 
possible choices. is linked to. Taunt is linked to Smarts, so 

verbally humiliating someone is resisted by 
Example: Gabe fires a minigun at a group of 

that attribute. Fighting, when used as a Test 
rampaging insectoids. He places a Medium 

instead of an actual attack, isn’t compared to 
Blast Template over five of them and rolls his 

Parry — it’s opposed by Agility. 
Shooting die and a Wild die. He has the Rock 
and Roll! Edge so he ignores Recoil but still If the attacker wins the opposed roll, he 
subtracts 2 from his total for Medium Range. can choose to make his foe Distracted or 

He ends up with a 9 on his Shooting roll. Vulnerable (see page 100). If he wins with 
Two of the insectoids were behind a large rock a raise, the target is also Shaken or there may 

and get Medium Cover. That subtracts 4 from be other subjective effects as the GM allows, 
the total so that’s a single succ— ethesy'sre such as a tripped foe being knocked prone. 
Distracted. Modifiers: The GM must determine which 

Three of the targets were out in the open so modifiers apply to a Test. Shooting, for 
theyre hit with a raise. Gabe can hit up to five example, should include Range, Cover, 
given his weapon's RoF, so all three take damage. Illumination, Recoil, etc. A hero with a bonus 

The Rate of Fire of 5 means each “shot” is 40 to his Parry does not add it to his Agility when 
bullets, multiplied by three for Suppressive Fire. challenged with a Fighting roll, however, 
That's 120 bullets, which is why miniguns come because the defender resists with Agility — 
loaded with lots of ammo! not his Parry. 

Take the details into consideration as well — 
using Taunt to hit a rival's ego where it hurts, 
for example, might be worth a +2 bonus to 

Combat often starts before everyone involved the attacker. 
is prepared. An ambush, a sudden double- 

Repetition: Using the same or similar 
cross, or a trap might all give one side in a 

action repeatedly quickly grows less effective, 
fight an edge over the other. 

so the GM should apply a steep penalty if 
When this happens, the ambushers are a character's Tests become repetitive (or 

automatically on Hold. Deal them in as usual disallow it entirely). 
anyway in case one of them gets a Joker. 

Additional Dice: If characters have addi- 
The victims of the attack make a Notice tional dice for a Test, such as when using a 

roll (if they haven't already, perhaps from weapon with a high Rate of Fire, he may roll 
ambushers sneaking up on them). Those who all the dice but takes only the highest as his 
make it are dealt in as usual. Those who fail Test total. He doesn’t get multiple results and 
get no Action Card and can’t act in the first he can’t spread them out to other targets. 
round of combat. 

TEST TOUGH ATTAGK 
A character who simply wants to touch a foe 

The Support option (page 106) allows (usually to deliver a magical effect of some 
a character to help out her allies. Test is kind) may add +2 to his Fighting roll. 
the opposite —it lets him make things 
more difficult for his foes! Tests include 
embarrassing an opponent, throwing sand in TWO WEAPONS 
his eyes, staring him down with a steely gaze, A character armed with two melee weapons 
or anything else a clever player can think of adds +1 to his Fighting rolls if his foe has a 
to rattle his enemy and put him off-balance. single weapon or is unarmed, and has no 
To perform a Test, the player describes the shield. It adds no bonus against creatures 

action and works with the GM to determine with Natural Weapons (page 104). 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



Wielding two firearms offers no special Damage and how to handle vehicles on 
advantage other than additional ammunition. the tabletop are covered on page 113, under 
Characters who want to specialize further Chases & Vehicles. 

can take the Two-Fisted or Two-Gun Kid 
Edge (page 44). WILD ATTAGK 

Sometimes a desperate character may want 
to throw caution to the wind and attack with 

It’s difficult to parry a blade with one’s bare everything he’s got. 
hands. An attacker armed with a melee A Wild Attack adds +2 to the character's 
weapon adds +2 to his Fighting attacks if his Fighting attacks and resulting damage rolls 
foe has no weapon or shield. (This doesn’t for the turn, but he is Vulnerable until the end 
stack with the Drop.) of his next turn (not this one). 

Wild Attacks can be used with multiple 
UNSTABLE PLATFORM attacks, such as from Multi-Actions or the 

Frenzy and Sweep Edges. 
A character attempting to fire or throw a 
ranged weapon from the back of a horse 
or other mount, a moving vehicle, or other WITHDRAWING FROM MELEE 
“unstable platform” subtracts 2 from his total. Whenever a character retreats from melee, 

all adjacent non-Shaken and non-Stunned 
VEHIGLES opponents get an immediate Free Attack (see 

Free Attacks, page 101). 
A sample list of vehicles is included in 
Chapter Two along with any relevant Notes. Example: Red is surrounded by five strange 
Vehicular weapons work just like any xenos and must get to a wounded Gabe. She 

other — characters make Shooting rolls to hit takes the Defend option (increasing her Parry 
a target and roll damage if successful (plus by +4) and backs away. All five xenos get a 
a bonus die if they hit with a raise). Unless a Free Attack, at +4 for Ganging Up. Fortunately, 
character has the Steady Hands Edge, don’t Red's high Parry fends them off and she makes 
forget the Unstable Platform penalty. her way fo her injured friend. 






HE Al VENTURE 
TOOL KI 

_ GHAPTER FOUR 

The following chapter contains tools the Game = WEALTH: An optional system for those 
Master can use for all the special situations who don’t want to worry about tracking 
that often come up in a game, such as: income and expenses. 
= ALLIES: Managing Extras under the player 
character's control. 

® CHASES & VEHICLES: Dynamic and thrilling 
chases on foot, in cars, or on motorcycles, or 
dogfights between massive fleets of starships! Allies play a big part in many Savage Worlds 

= DRAMATIC TASKS: Add tension and drama games. They serve as troops under your hero's 
tosituations like defusing abomb or hacking command in Weird Wars, loyal retainers in 

a computer. fantasy settings, or fellow fighters in glorious 
rebellions against oppression. 

® FEAR: The effects of overwhelming terror. 
When to Use These Rules: Use these rules 

® HAZARDS: The effects of scorching heat, 
to help keep track of the party’s followers and 

bitter cold, radiation, and more. 
give them a little extra personality to play off 

= INTERLUDES: Narrative storytelling for of as well. 
long trips or to reveal bits about the player 

The Basics: Players create, control, and 
characters’ backstories. 

track their own followers and nonplayer 
® MASS BATTLES: Desperate last stands character allies. 
against incredible odds between armies. 

8 NETWORKING: Gathering information or USING ALLIES 
asking for favors. 

Keeping up with allies in Savage Worlds is 
= QUICK ENCOUNTERS: A fast and easy way 

simple. Just download the Ally Sheet from 
to resolve fights, heists, or capers when 

our website and fill in the blanks. 
pressed for time. 

Allied Extras are divided up among all the 
® SETTING RULES: A host of special rules you 

players to control. This is a very important 
can use to customize your setting! 

part of Savage Worlds because our settings 
= SOCIAL CONFLICT: Run a court trial, plead often feature allied bands of skilled hirelings, 
for aid, or convince a crowd. fellow grunts, or loyal retainers, and the game 

= TRAVEL: Figure out how long it takes for is designed to handle them quickly and easily. 
the party to cross your savage world! It's also designed for the players to control 

them — not the Game Master. 



It doesn’t matter whether or not the ALLIES & ADVANGEMENT 
characters control the allies, only that the Allies can improve their abilities as well. See 

[72] players do. This keeps everyone involved Advancement on page 54. 
[=] 
pu in the action even if his hero is out of the 
[+4 fight, and makes running large combats 
[®) much easier and more fun for everyone. Of 
S Keeping track of ammo for all your allies can 

course the GM can always take charge of be difficult. Here's an easy and dramatic way 
[#] Extras when the need arises, but with good to handle this problem. 
& roleplayers this should rarely be necessary. 

The ammo level of each group of allied 
= ALLIED PERSONALITIES Extras starts at Very High, High (the usual 
0 level), Low, or Out, as determined by the GM. 

You can add a little flavor to your allies by 
rolling on the Allied Personalities table. Jot After each fight, the ammo automatically 
down the keyword on the Ally Sheet so you drops a level. This makes for dramatic 
and your Game Master have a little insight situations and realistic logistical problems 
into each particular ally’s character. while eliminating the bookkeeping. 

Consider these general impressions with The GM can always decide otherwise, of 
no particular game effect. They help both the course. Perhaps the troops are told to fight 
player and GM decide just how an ally might with hand weapons instead of their firearms, 
react in a given situation. In a Weird War Two or they don’t get to fire off more than a couple 
game, for instance, a player with a young of shots before the fight is over. 
lieutenant character could look over his list 
and choose the “Observant” character to pull TYPIGAL ALLIES 
guard duty. If he has to go with the “Lazy” 

Here are a few typical soldier archetypes you 
soldier for some reason, there's a good chance 

might use for your Savage Worlds games. Fill 
the GM will rule he falls asleep sometime 

in any additional skills or Edges as you see fit. 
during his watch. 

A group of rangers, for example, should have 

ALLIED PERSONALTIES the Survival skill, while cavalrymen should 
have the Riding skill, and so on. 

D20 PERSONALITY D20 PERSONALITY 

1 Treacherous 11 Crude SOLDIER 
2 Cruel 12 Agile Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit dé, 

3 Od 13 Observant Strength d6, Vigor d6 
Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge dé, 

4 Happy 14 Clueless 
Fighting dé, Intimidation d6, Notice d6, 

5 Experienced 15 Mysterious Persuasion d6, Shooting d6, Stealth d4 
6  Gung-Ho 16 Creative Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 5 

7 Lazy 17 Artistic Hindrances: — 
Edges: Soldier 

8 Sneaky 18 Fearless 

9 Bright 19 Cowardly EXPERIENCED SOLDIER 
10 Young 20 Heroic Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts dé, Spirit dé, 

Strength d8, Vigor d8 
Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge dé, 
Fighting d8, Intimidation d6, Notice d6, 
Persuasion d6, Shooting d8, Stealth d4 

Pace: 6; Parry: 6; Toughness: 6 
Hindrances: — 
Edges: Soldier and any two combat Edges. 

112 



Critical Failure: The standard results for 
GHASES & VEHIGLES Critically Failing a maneuvering roll are listed 

below, but the GM can always create her own 
result appropriate to the situation as well: 

One of the most thrilling staples of adventure 
* Mounted: Roll a d6. 1-2: the rider loses his 

film, television, and fiction is the chase. This 
turn; 3-4: his mount suffers Fatigue (this 

simple twist on the regular combat rules lets 
applies to the animal's rolls and the rider's 

you race muscle cars over blasted deserts, 
Riding rolls); 5-6: the rider suffers Fatigue 

track freestyle runners across concrete jungles, 
from a bad bounce, low-hanging obstacle, 

and even recreate desperate dogfights in the 
or overexertion trying to control his animal. 

sky or the depths of space. 
* Vehicle: The operator must roll on the Out 

When to Use These Rules: Use the Quick of Control table (page 119). 
Encounter rules if you just want to find out * Walking/Running: Roll a die. Even, he 
if the heroes catch a fleeing foe. If you want loses the rest of his turn as he stumbles, 
more detail, use these rules for highly mobile negotiates an obstacle, or takes a wrong 
pursuits too large for the tabletop. You'll turn. Odd, he suffers Fatigue. 
also find rules for resolving damage against 
vehicles, and what effect it has on their drivers 
in this section. SETUP 
The Basics: Participants vie for position To start a chase, shuffle an extra deck of 

using “Chase Cards” to track relative distance. Action Cards and deal them out in a row on | 
the table (nine is a good number for most a 

MANEUVERING SKILLS chases, add more as needed). m 

The following rules often call for maneuvering Now break all the participants into each 2 
g 

skill rolls. Exactly what skill that is depends group that will move and act independently. i 
on whether the character is on foot, mounted, Everyone in the same ship, boat, or vehicle, Im 

or in a vehicle of some sort: for example, is one group. In a foot chase, 2 
1 

= AIRPLANE OR SPACESHIP: Piloting each player character acts independently c: 
= FOOT OR BIKE: Athletics because they move independently. The horde =x 

m 
= MOUNT OR WAGON: Riding of Extras chasing them can be broken up into 
® VEHICLE: Driving groups as the GM decides. = 

) 
® WATERCRAFT: Boating © 

~ 
& 



Red and Gabe pursue a ninja in a foot chase (a 5” Range Increment). 
Gabe is four cards from the ninja so he's 20" (40 yards) away. 
Red is two cards from the ninja so she's 10" (20 yards) away. 

The rear-most character or vehicle should The participants can move along the track 
be at the rear — on the far left card or “Card using the Change Position maneuver (page 
1.” Everyone else should be placed to his right 115), closing on foes, running from them, or 
as fits the circumstances. Add more cards to attempting to reach some objective. 
either end of the row if someone falls behind The length of each round is up to the GM, 
or surges ahead. but is usually a combat round in a foot or car 
The Range is the number of Chase Cards chase. Battles in space might represent many 

between participants (not counting the minutes per round until the action zooms in 
attacker's card) times the Range Increment, on a fast-paced dogfight. 
which varies for the type of chase: Boarders: Characters in or on an enemy 

vehicle get their own Action Card (as a group). 
RANGE INCREMENTS 

Minimum Speed: The Game Master must 
TYPE INCREMENT decide who's allowed to participate in a chase. 
Foot, Mounted, or Vehicular 5 A kid ona bike might be able to chase bandits 
Airplane or Sailing Ship 25 in a car if the streets are very congested, but 

Jets or Starships 50 is left behind after a round on the open road. 
Ending the Chase: A chase ends when 

These are suggested ranges based on the one side gets away (disabling all pursuers, 
weapons typically used in that type of chase. the Flee maneuver, etc.) or is forced to stop. 
The goal is to give most ranged weapons the Participants can always choose to stop if they 
ability to fire at a few cards distance and give want, either dropping out or stopping to 
an advantage to those with longer ranged engage their enemies. 
weapons. Increase or decrease the Range 

A chase might also end after a certain 
Increment as makes sense for the particular 

number of rounds or as one or more of those 
scenario. In a tank battle, for instance, you 

involved reach a certain card along the track. 
might want to change the Range Increment 

In a Weird War Two bombing run, for example, 
to 100, even though it’s a “vehicular” fight. 

the bombers might need to reach the last 
card on the track to drop their payload. The 

GHASE ROUNDS fighters scrambling after them must try to 
Once all the participants are placed, deal each stop them before they reach their target. 
independent character or group an Action 
Card at the start of each round as usual. They GHASE AGTIONS 
then act in whatever order they choose as Characters in a chase can do most anything 
their Action Card comes up. This is important they'd normally do, such as Test, Support, use 
so passengers can Support their driver before powers, or make attacks. The GM decideshow 
he has to make a critical roll, Testa foe to make close a character has to be to try a particular 
him Vulnerable, attack before their vehicle action. A defender must be able to see or hear 

changes distance (or after) to take maximum a Taunt for it to be effective, for example. If 
advantage of their weapons, and so on. the attacker and defender are connected via 

114 



audio or video feeds, of course, distance 
probably won't matter. GROUPS 
Nonplayer character crews of ships, Make Group rolls for Extras who move 

starships, and other large vehicles are and act together. If they have a Wild Card 
assumed to be doing their jobs already leader, use his skill to make maneuvering 
and shouldn't roll Support or Tests. Those rolls and assume his leadership keeps the 

special actions are the domain of the player ~&roup together. 
characters or named Extras and Wild Cards — This means Shaken members of a group are 
including those on the opposing side! dragged along with the rest, and individual 
Held Actions: A character on Hold may Wounds or other conditions are ignored 

attempt to interrupt enemy actions as usual. unless that specific member is targeted, or 
In personal combat (including foot chases), all the members of the group share the same 
the two make opposed Athletics rolls, When condition. 
mounted, it's opposed Riding rolls. In vehicle 
chases, the GM must decide which skills are 
most appropriate (Athletics vs. maneuvering and may move one Chase Card in either 
to interrupt the driver, for example). direction. 
If trying to act before an entire vehicle, ship, 

® CHANGE POSITION (Action or Free Action): 
or group with multiple characters takes its A character or driver may change his 
action, the opposed roll should be made position by making a maneuvering roll as =] 
against the driver or leader. a free action. Success allows him to move a 

up or down one Chase Card, and up to two m 
with a raise. The character may also Change 2 

Below are a number of special maneuvers g 
Position as an action, adding +2 to her roll. 

characters can attempt during a chase. <5 
Either way, this maneuver may only be Im 

Maneuvers may also be part of a Multi- used once per turn. 2 
Action. A driver can Change Position and fire =i 

his weapon, for example, or say he attempts a Speed Bonus: If a rider, runner, ship, or c: 
Force if he gets close enough. vehicle's Top Speed is faster than the fastest =x 

m 
of his rivals, he adds +1 to his maneuvering 

= BOARD (Action): Sailing ships use grappling — 
roll to Change Position, or +2 if he’s twice 

hooks and planks to pull their prey close ) 
as fast. 0 

and board. Starships might use breaching i 
tubes or assault pods. Dropping Back: In a linear chase, a char- 

acter may drop “back” one or two Chase & 
Toboard, the attacker and defender must be 1 

Cards without making a maneuvering roll. 
on the same Chase Card. The two then make He may not Change Position further, either 
opposed maneuvering rolls. If the attacker 

as an action or a free action. 
is successful, the two vessels are joined and 
his crew may board the enemy craft. EVADE (Action or Free Action): The 

character or driver zigzags through terrain, 
If defenders have been designated to 

maximizes cover, or otherwise concentrates 
repel boarders and weren't being used for onnot getting hit. Melee and ranged attacks 
other purposes (such as sailing or crewing against him, his vehicle, or anyone on it 
stations on a starship), they start on Hold suffer a —2 penalty until the start of that 
unless the attacker won the boarding roll vehicle's next turn. The character and any 
with a raise. occupants on his mount or in his vehicle 
Once a boarding action begins, the com- also take the penalty to their attacks as the 
mander of the boarded vessel can only erratic movement or obstacles affect their 
attempt to Change Position, which is made targeting and aim as well. If the character 
at —4 if grappling lines, tractor beams, performs this maneuver as an action, the 
or other restraints are involved. If she’s penalty increases to —4 (in both directions). 
successful, her vessel is no longer grappled Evade may not be taken more than once per 
(though some of the boarders may still be round (it does not stack). 
on her ship!). With a raise, she breaks free 

a 



® FLEE (Action): A character or vehicle may = RAM (Action): An attacker can Ram a 
escape the chase if there are at least four defender if theyre on the same Chase Card 

[72] Chase Cards between himself and the by making opposed maneuvering rolls. 
[=] 
pu closest foe. If so, he makes a maneuvering If successful, both participants cause the 
[+4 roll at —4 and escapes if successful. The following damage to the other: 
o penalty is reduced to -2 if there are at least 
S * Scale: The base damage each being or 

five cards between them, and 0 if there are vehicle causes is based on its Scale: Small 
[#] six or more. (d6), Normal (2d6), Large (3d6), Huge 
& ® FORCE (Action): The attacker attempts to (4d6), and Gargantuan (5d6). 

= force a rival away from his vehicle or into Raise: +d6 bonus damage for the attacker 
0 an obstacle. To do so, both must be on if he got a raise on his maneuvering roll. 

the same Chase Card and make opposed * Toughness: +d6 if the vehicle's Tough- 
maneuvering rolls. If the attacker wins, he ness is higher than his foe's; +2d6 if 
Bumps (see below) his foe. A raise is treated Toughness is twice as high. 
as if the defender rolled a Critical Failure e Speed: +d6 to both sides if the attacker's 
on a maneuvering roll (see Maneuvering Top Speed is between 60 and 120 MPH; 
Skills, page 113). +2d6 if it's over 120 MPH. 
The GM may also allow characters to GOMPLIGATIONS 
use other skills, such as Shooting, to put 

If a character or group’s Action Card is a Club, 
obstacles in the foe's path. Critical Failure 

something has gone wrong. An obstacle may 
means the attempt backfires on the attacker! 

block the path, the engine might stall, or a 
m HOLD STEADY (Free Action): The character, hero might have to run through mud, ice, 
driver, or pilot holds steady to line up uphill, or some other impediment. 
a better shot. They ignore the Unstable 

The character, driver, or pilot must make a 
Platform and Running penalties, but attacks 

maneuvering roll as a free action to deal with 
against the vehicle and all its occupants are 

the Complication. The suit on his current 
made at +2 until the beginning of their next 

Chase Card determines any modifier to the 
turn (this does not stack with Vulnerable). 

maneuvering roll and the results of failure. 
Note: The Action Card triggers the Comp- 

lication; the Chase Card defines any modifier 
(Mod) and the result of failure. 

Several circumstances result in a character 
or group being “Bumped.” The foe who COMPLICATIONS 
caused the Bump may move the defender SUIT MOD FAILURE RESULT 
one Chase Card in any direction. She may 

Treat as a Critical Failure 
do this at any time during her turn as Spades = on a maneuvering roll. 
she chooses (to resolve other attacks first, 

Hearts _ The character or 
for example). vehicle is Bumped. 
When a target is Bumped by an indirect 

Diamonds 2 The character or 
action (such as a Complication), the vehicle is Bumped. 
opposing side chooses the direction. 

Treat as a Critical Failure 
An attacker can’t Bump a particular target Clubs = on a maneuvering roll. 
more than one space each turn regardless The character or 
of the source (multiple attacks, the Force Joker +2 vehicle is Bumped up 
maneuver, etc.). Other attackers, even to two Chase Cards. 

those sharing the same Action Card, may 
Bump the target separately, however. Special Conditions: GMs can also use 

Groups always stay together in a chase, Complications to trigger special conditions or 
hazards of the encounter. For example, trig- 

so they're only moved if their driver or 
gering reinforcements anytime a Diamond 

leader is Bumped, or the GM feels it’s 
Complication occurs, or the first character to 

narratively appropriate. 
fail a Club Complication is hit by lightning 

Bumps are only used in chases. Ignore during a battle in a fierce storm. 
them on the tabletop. 



ATTAGKS DAMAGE 
= CHARACTERS/MOUNTS: Damage is 

Characters may make ranged and melee resolved normally, but if the character (or 
attacks normally, using all their usual Edges his mount) is Shaken, Stunned, or Wounded 
and Hindrances as usual as long as the GM in a chase, he’s Bumped as well. 
agrees they make sense in the particular ® VEHICLES: Vehicles cannot be Shaken, but if 
situation. damage equals or exceeds their Toughness 
= MELEE ATTACKS: In foot, mounted, or car (whether they take a Wound or not), the 
chases, characters can make hand-to-hand driver must make a maneuvering roll or go 
attacks only if theyre on the same Chase Out of Control (see page 119). 
Card. The usual rules, such as the Gang-Up Each raise on a vehicular damage roll 
bonus, Withdrawing from Melee, Innocent causes a Wound and one roll on the Vehicle 
Bystanders, etc., apply as the GM sees fit. Critical Hits table (not one roll per Wound). 
Should anyone want to attack a moving Most vehicles can take three Wounds before 
vehicle, its Parry is 2+ half the driver's they're Wrecked (page 118). Each Wound 
maneuvering skill, plus its Handling. reduces a vehicle’s Handling by 1 (to a 
Attacks aren’t usually possible between maximum of —4). 
very fast vehicles, airplanes, starships, If this is a chase, damage that equals or 
and the like. exceeds a vehicle's Toughness also Bumps 

= RANGED ATTACKS: Drivers and chara- it (page 116), but only once per attacker. 
cters can fire ranged weapons as usual. Called Shots on Vehicles: To target a 
The Range is the number of Chase Cards particular part of a vehicle, the GM assigns 
between participants (not counting the a modifier based on the dimensions of the 
attacker’s card) times the Range Increment. target. See Size & Scale on page 106 and 
Attacks may also target crew if they're Cover on page 99 for specifics. If the 
visible (don’t forget any Cover they might attack is successful and causes a Wound, it 
have). also causes the effects for that area (see the 

Vehicle Critical Hit table). 

FINED WEAPONS 
Front-mounted weapons may only fire at targets ahead of them, side weapons to their 
respective sides, and rear weapons behind. Top or bottom mounted turreted weapons 
may fire in any direction unless the situation or particular vehicle says otherwise (assume 
ships, planes, or starships rise and fall during the turn to accommodate their top or 
bottom weapons). 
Fixed Side-Mounted Weapons (Cannons): Firing fixed side-mounted weapons — those 

that must be aimed by turning the entire vessel — must be positioned. The captain or pilot 
chooses his target and makes an opposed maneuvering roll as an action. Failure means he 
can’t line up a shot this turn. Success means the attacker may fire up to half his guns on one 
side at the target, and a raise means he may fire all of them at that target (a “broadside”). 
Treat each set of up to four cannons as “linked” (see page 82), rolling attacks and damage 

separately for each set. 
Crossing the T: If a Large target (or greater) is hit by a broadside at Short Range, it’s 

“raked” along its length. Add an additional d6 to each damage roll resulting from the rake. 

Weapons with this quality spray massive amounts of matter or energy, making them 
quick to fire against enemies who dart in and out of range to attack. Once per round 
when their craft is attacked, Reaction Fire weapons may return fire at 2. The attack is 
resolved after the enemy’s who triggered it (if the gunner survives). 

LD TOOL FHUNLNINAVY FHL 



on large boats or ships don’t take Wounds 
Vehicles take three Wounds before they're but must contend with Swimming rolls and 
“Wrecked” as their base. Large vehicles can survival afterward. 

take four Wounds, Huge can take five, and Occupants of an aircraft make an Athletics 
Gargantuans can take six. roll if they have parachutes to land safely. 
A wrecked land vehicle can’t move, but Failure means they take Bumps & Bruises, 

its weapons may still be fired if they aren't page 125, from a hard landing. Those who 
powered by the vehicle's propulsion system. roll a Critical Failure on Athletics or are 

without parachutes plummet to their death, 
Watercraft sink. Small vessels sink in a few 

unless the GM feels they have a chance to 
rounds. Medium boats might take up to an 

survive. In that case they suffer Falling 
hour to slip beneath the surface, and large 

damage (see page 127) instead. 
ships might take several hours. 
Aircraft plummet to the ground and are REPAIRS 

destroyed. Characters may repair vehicles given sufficient 
Occupants: Those inside a vehicle (and time and atleast some basic tools. The attempt 

whatever it hits, if it matters) take damage takes two hours per Wound and a Repair roll. 
depending on what caused the Wreck: If the roll fails, the mechanic must start over. 

® COLLISIONS: If the vehicle is Wrecked from Field work requires at least a toolbox and 
a Collision on the Out of Control table, the basic supplies, and subtracts2 from the Repair 
passengers suffer Xd6 damage, where Xis roll. An average garage negates this penalty, 
equal to the Wounds the vehicle suffered and an excellent or dedicated facility adds +2. 
from the collision (don’t forget any Air Each success and raise on the Repair roll 
Bags & Safety Harnesses, page 82). fixes one of the vehicle’s Wounds. With an 

® DAMAGE: If the vehicle is Wrecked from additional raise above and beyond what's 
Wounds caused by enemy attacks, occu- required to fix all Wounds, the repair time 
pants in a land vehicle, speed boat, starship, is halved. 
or similar vessel take 3d6 damage, or 5d6 if Wrecks: Wrecked vehicles can be repaired 
the GM feels the vehicle was traveling at a if the mechanic has access to a full body shop 
high speed (usually in excess of 60 MPH) or and spare parts (GM's call). This takes a full 
some other precarious circumstance. Those day before other repairs can be made. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



OUT OF CONTROL 
Damage caused by an Out of Control roll doesn't trigger another Out of Control roll. 

2D6 EFFECT 

> Major Collision: Everyone in the vehicle is Distracted. It takes d4 Wounds and one Critical 
Hit. 

3-4 Minor Collision: The vehicle takes a Wound and a Critical Hit. 

Distracted: Ground vehicles spin out or skid. Airplanes or spaceships stall, slide, flip, or roll 
unexpectedly. Everyone on board is Distracted until the end of their next turn. 

10-11 Vulnerable: The vehicle and everyone on board is Vulnerable until the end of their next turn. 

12 Gl:i tch: Something is jarred loose or breaks from rough handling. The vehicle sufers a Critical 
Hit (reroll Crew results). 

VEHICLE CRITICAL HITS 
206 EFFECT 

Scratch and Dent: The attack just scratches the paint or passes clean through the body without 
hitting anyone or anything vital. There's no permanent damage. 

Guidance/Traction: The wheels, tracks, sails, thrusters, etc. have been hit. Reduce Handling 
by one each time this occurs (to a maximum penalty of —4). 

45 Locomotion: The engine, mainsails, boiler, etc., is hit. Top Speed is reduced by 10% each time 
this occurs (to a minimum of 60% Top Speed). = 

6-8 Chassis: The vehicle suffers a hit in the body with no special effects. Im 

Crew: For direct damage, subtract the vehicle’s Armor (if appropriate for the victim's position) > 
9-10 and apply the remainder to a random crew member. Area effect weapons affect everyone in - 

a section determined by the GM. If this is the result of a Collision, the occupants are Shaken. m 

11 Weapon: A random weapon is destroyed. If there is no weapon, this is a Chassis hit instead. 3 

12 System: The vehicle loses an electronic system, its airbags, or some other system determined (= 
by the GM. If it doesn’t have any special features, treat this as a Chassis hit instead. B 

y =] 
Roll a d6. On a 1-2, the runner loses his Ne} 

CUSTOMIZED CHASES turn. On a 3-4, he takes Fatigue. On a 5-6, e 

A little customization can make each chase he tumbles over an edge and must make = 
different and unique. Here are some ideas an immediate Athletics roll (a free action). oc 
you can use for your encounters. Success means he catches a ledge, railing, 

gutter, or other precipice and can pull himself 
GITY STREETS up with a Strength roll (a free action each 

Busy streets are a dangerous place for high- round). Failure means he’s stuck for the turn 
speed vehicle or frantic foot chases. Ranged and can take no further actions. A Critical 
attacks are made at -2 (in addition to Range Failure means the hero falls d6 x 10 stories — 
penalties) to account for the Cover of ©F whatever the GM feels is appropriate for 
buildings, cars, pedestrians, and so on. that city. 
Complications besides Jokers have a mini- EEp SPARE 

mum penalty of -2 to represent the dangers 
The Unstable Platform penalty (see page 

of running red lights, pedestrians that must 
109) usually applies in chases, but it can be 

be avoided, blocked streets, or other hazards. 
ignored in the vacuum of deep space! 

Rooftops: If the chase takes place on 
rooftops, change the results for Critical [J)GHGHTS & DUELS 
Failures (and failed Complications that say The Chase rules generally assume the 
to treat the result as a Critical Failure) to the  ymbatantsare moving in the same direction — 
following: chasing prey, toward a target or escape route, 

etc. But the rules can also easily accommodate 



dogfights, tank battles, demolition derbies, NAVAL CHASES 
and aerial or naval duels by arranging the Bringing a target to battle on the high seas

Aa C  
hase Cards in different w

c
a a
y n
s  
. take many hours or even days depending on 

Instea
= d of dealing the Chase Cards in a the weather and the initial distance between 

| straight line, arrange them in a 4 x4 grid to the vessels
[=] . 

create 
= a more fluid battlefield. Vehicles move If the ships are more than a mile apar

a t
n  w
d h
 c e
o n
u  
nt Range orthogonally (no diagonals). first en

8 | Use common sense when determining 
=  

countered, assume the first phase of 
the chase represents the pursu

w er
e  
ap tr
o y
n in
 g
a  
rc t
s o
  
and vehicle facings. A pirate bring the prey to bat

= tle. Treat each round as 

a  
ship with cannons on either side, for example about four hours (or much longer in the
c  
a a
n ge
 f  

i o
r f
e  
 left and right on an action, but can’t sail if the wind is against them) and the Range

f  
ire at targets ahead or behind them on the Increment as a mile. 
same action. 

Once the pursuer reaches the same 
C Chase 
hange the Range Increment as makes Card as the prey, “zoom” in o

s n
e  
n t
s h
e e 

f a
o c
r ti
y o
o n
u  
r particular battle, letting the and run the chase as usual, perh

w a
e p
a s 
p u
o s
n i
s n
 g
w  t
i h
t e
h  
 the longest ranges reach across Dogfights and Duels option disc

th u
e s
 s
b e
o d
a  
r a
d b
 o
b v
u e
t .
  
forcing those with shorter range 

to geitn  close. 

You can also place special cards in the grid “YR! J 
to represent asteroid fields or space stations in 

42% 
space battles, whirlpools and islands in naval 
battles, and so on. They might be impassable 
or have their own special rules as you see fit. 

VEHIGLES ON THE TABLETOP a 
For car orboat chases and aerial or space duels with a lot of movement and mobility, use the | 
Chase system. In tabletop battles where vehicles must operate in a confined space (and you 
want to use miniatures!) use these simple rules to handle the movement of most common 
land vehicles. 

MOVEMENT 
Vehicles can move up to 12" on the tabletop (or their Pace if slower than that) without having 
to make maneuvering rolls or worry about crashing into obstacles. At that speed they can 
move as desired and end their turn facing any direction. 

If a driver wants to go faster, up to 24" per turn unless the GM says otherwise given the 
terrain and situation, he can do so but must make a maneuvering roll. The GM should 
assign a penalty (-1 to —4) if the move takes the vehicle through Difficult Ground, tight turns, 
or hazards. If the roll is successful, the vehicle ends its move wherever the driver wants. 
Failure means the vehicle moves only 12". 

A Critical Failure means the vehicle goes Out of Control (page 119). If that indicates a 
collision, the GM can move it into the nearest obstacle or decide it’s a feature not modeled 
on the tabletop such as a pothole, small ditch, fallen log, battlefield debris, etc. 
Note: Ramming is an opposed test of maneuvering skills. If the attacker hits, use the 

damage described under the Ram maneuver on page 116. 

Printable “Figure Flats” of characters, vehicles, and monsters are available for 
most of our settings! 
a—  Ae 



EXAMPLE: RED'S DEAD 
Passengers

REDEMPTION  and crews go in whatever 
order they decide on their Action Card 

Red is chasing a notorious space pirate who This can make for dramatic and interactive 
injured Gabe in a previous encounter. Both experiences with a little narrative 
Red and the pirate have identical star fighters. interpretation. On a pirate ship, the 
Red is on the first Chase Card and the captain makes the maneuvering (Boating) 

pirate’s on the fifth. That means the Range is rolls. The rest of the player characters 
200" (4 x the Range Increment of 50"). That's fire a cannon, take a shot with a musket 
Long Range for her Gatling laser so she (if the captain is willing to get that close!), 
decides to get closer. She makes a Piloting roll yell insults at the enemy (Test), or point 
as a free action and gets a 7, +2 for her ship's out hazards (Support for the captain's 
Handling gives her a 9. That's a success and Boating rolls). 

a raise so she moves two Chase Cards closer. The player character-controlled “bridge 
There are now two Chase Cards between crew” of a starship can do the same. 

Red and her target, or 100". That's Medium Maybe the captain focuses on Testing 
Range for her Gatling so she fires it up. the enemy in a duel of wits and leaves 

the maneuvering rolls to
The base TN is 4, 2 for Medium Range (no  the Navigation 

officer. The Weapons offic
penalty for Unstable Platform in space!). The ers fire weapons 

while the Engineer Suppor
Rate of Fire on the Gatling is 4 though, so ts the navigator, 

captain, or gunners as needed eRed rolls four d10s (her Shooting skill) and ach turn. 

a Wild die. She gets one regular hit and one 
with a raise. The regular hit causes 16 damage, 
which is 2 over the pirate’s Toughness of EEMINDETZS 
14. The pirate must make a Piloting roll (he 

« Add or subtract Chase Cards to t
he 

makes it) or go Out of Control. Since this is a 
Chase, Red also Bumps him a card away — a track as needed. 
smart move since the pirate goes next. « A character's Action Card determinesif a 

Complication occurs, but his Chase Card Now Red resolves the hit with a raise. This 
determines any penalty and results of one causes a Wound. She can’t Bump the 

pirate again in her same turn, but he still has failure. i 

« Dealing with a Complication is a free to make another Piloting roll or go Out of 
Control. He fails this time and rolls a 3 on the action. 

s Evade and Hold Steady are good 
table, which gives him another Wound. Since 

options for characters who don’t expect he took Wounds from the attack, he takes a 
frequent chases and so don't have Edges Critical Hit as well. It's a 5, so his Top Speed 
like Steady Hands. drops 10%. He's now slower than Red so she 

adds +1 to her Piloting rolls when changing 
positions. 



falling starship, the GM must set the number 
DRAMATIC TASKS of rounds and tokens required for victory 

herself. Here are some guidelines. 
Assume each player will average one 

Heroes often find themselves in tense and 
dangerous situations such as defusing abomb, success per turn. Use that as a guideline if 

| hacking a computer, or rescuing people from you want the task to be “fair,” and set the 

a burning building or sinking ship with a number of rounds from three to five as you 

definite — and sometimes deadly — time limit. feel appropriate. A party of five given three 
rounds to save a starship, for example, needs 

The system below simulates these events to accumulate 15 Task Tokens in three rounds. 
and helps the Game Master insert some Increase or decrease the number of tokens to 
drama into what would otherwise be simple make it more or less challenging. 
skill rolls. 

If the number of tokens achieved is a 
When to Use These Rules: Dramatic Tasks measure of success rather than a straight 

are great for tense actions that must be win/fail condition, such as rescuing victims 
performed in a hurry or have disastrous from a fire or taking bags of gold from a bank 
effects if failed. before the automated vault closes, simply 
The Basics: The heroes make skill rolls to set the possible number of tokens that may 

accumulate “Task Tokens” and resolve the be gathered in the time allowed. Each token 
event before time runs out. gathered represents a person saved, a bag 

recovered, etc. It's up to you whether it’s 

SETUP possible to save them all (using the guide 
above) or not. 

The Game Master starts by figuring out 
what the task is, how long the party has to Don’t be afraid to let the party choose how 

complete it, and how many tokens they need many will attempt the task either, especially 

for success. if there's something else going on at the same 
time. Deciding how many heroes will hack 

SINGLE PERSON TASKS a large computer system while they're being 

Use these guidelines when only a single attacked by security drones allows them to 

character can attempt the task each turn: choose their tactics. 

= CHALLENGING: Collect four Task Tokens in 
three rounds. Examples: Defuse an explosive PERFORMING THE TASK 
with nobooby traps, hackakeypad ina low- Characters are dealt Action Cards as usual 
end security door, untangle a parachute during a Dramatic Task. Those attempting 
before it hits the ground, disengage a the task make relevant skill checks and get a 
railroad car. Task Token for each success and raise. Failure 

® DIFFICULT: Collect six Task Tokens in four means no progress and a Critical Failure 
rounds. Examples: Defuse a bomb with a reduces progress by one (if there are any). 
booby trap, cast a ritual, land a passenger The skills that can be used to accumulate 
jet with no Piloting skill and instructions tokens depends on the situation. They might 
from the tower. be defined, such as Repair to defuse a bomb, 

= COMPLEX: Collect eight Task Tokens in or they might be open —a police officer 
five rounds. Examples: Defuse a bomb with might use Athletics to carry people from a 
multiple booby traps inside a protective burning building while a mage uses felekinesis 
case, hack into a highly protected computer (Spellcasting). 
system, cast a large and powerful ritual, 
repair a complicated machine with multiple MULTIPLE SKILLS 
moving or electronic parts. The GM can break tasks down into steps if she 

likes, each of which might require different 
MULTI-PERSON TASKS skills. In defusing a bomb, for example, the 

If more than one person can attempt the task heroes might first have to get two tokens 
atonce, such as crewing different stations in a to crack open the casing using Repair, then 

122 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



three more tokens using Electronics to rewire 
the timer. 

Requiring multiple skills throughout the 
task makes it more difficult since raises from 
one type of skill check don’t carry over to 
the other. In the bomb example above, for 
example, cracking open the case requires two 
Repair successes. Additional successes don’t 
carry over to the Electronics rolls needed 
afterward. 

GOMPLIGATIONS 
If a character's Action Card is a Club, some- 
thing has gone wrong. Attempts to resolve 
the task (or Support it!) are made at an 
additional -2. 

Worse, if a roll is failed during a Compl- 
ication, the Dramatic Task fails — the bomb 
explodes, the computer locks the hacker out, 
a victim cannot be saved, and so on. The 
character may choose nof to attempt a roll on a] 

a turn he has a Complication — it just costs a 
m 

him precious time. 2 
Support: Characters assisting with the g 

Support option suffer the Complication < 
Im 

penalty, and an additional -2 if their Action The GM decides only one character can 2 
Card is a Club! Critical Failure on their part | 

defuse the bomb, and that it’s a Challenging 
just subtracts from the leads roll as usual, c 

task (four Task Tokens in three rounds). The =x 
however, it doesn’t cause the entire task to fail. GM also decides each step is a Repair roll at m 

-2 for the difficulty of Fire Bug's devices. Gabe | 

starts working on the bomb right away while ) 
Think carefully before designing Dramatic o 

Red keeps the gang members away. ir 
Tasks that might wipe out the entire party if 

Gabe gets a success and a raise on his first 8 
failed. The threat of catastrophe should be -} 

very real — Savage Worlds is designed around round thanks to Support from Red (who 

that very concept —but you don’t want a also uses Suppressive Fire as a Multi-Action 

couple of bad die rolls to end the entire game. to keep the gang members away). He's 
halfway there! 

Instead of total disaster, maybe the party 
has a moment to run before the bomb A Complication comes up on the second 

explodes. They don’t perish, but later awake round. Gabe is low on Bennies so he decides 

in the local hospital, or even captured and to wait and Supports Red’s Suppressive 

experience a new type of adventure. Fire instead. 

On the third and final round Gabe fails... 

EXAMPLE: THE FIRE the heroes have to run for it! KaBoOM! 
They failed to defuse the bomb and now the 

Gabe and Red are cops in New York City gang war is on — but this just leads to new 
searching for an arsonist who's been setting adventures for our heroes! 
fire bombs all over the city. The “Fire Bug” 
placed the latest bomb in a gang warehouse “You CAN'T win 

in hopes of starting a war with their rivals. eM ALL” 
Red and Gabe found the device and are —ABE 

trying to defuse it while the gangers attack 
the cops for being on their turf! 



BECOMING JADED 
After encountering a particular type of 

[72] creature, the character shouldn't have to 
a 
| make Fear checks every time he sees another 
[+4 Cold dread seizes the heroine as she enters 

in that particular scenario. If the party clears 
o the lost tomb. A dragon emerges from 
S out an asylum full of spectral inmates, for 

the cave, belching smoke and fire at the 
example, they should only have to roll the 

[2] adventurers who threaten its hoard. An 
first time they encounter them — not in every 

& investigator stumbles upon a scene of grisly, 
room. The Game Master might require a 

= ritualistic carnage. 
roll if the heroes encounter such horrors 

0 These rules reflect the horror of these in a particularly different or frightening 
terrible situations upon your heroes’ psyches. situation, however. 
When to Use These Rules: Characters in 

realistic, horror, or “dark” games should FEAR TABLE 
usually be subject to the constant effects of EFFECT 
fear and terror. Fear in high fantasy or super Adrenaline Surge: The hero's “fight” 
hero games is probably only used as the effect 1-3 response takes over. He acts as if he 
of a creature ability or arcane power. had a Joker this action! 

The Basics: Characters make a Spirit roll Distracted: The hero is Distracted 
when confronted by creatures or situations 4-4 until the end of his next turn. 

that cause Fear. 7.9 Vulnerable: The target is Vulnerable 
until the end of his next turn. 

FEAR GHEGKS 10-12 Shaken: The character is Shaken. 

The heroes make a Fear check (a Spirit roll as The Mark of Fear: The hero is Stunned 
and suffers some cosmetic physical 

a free action) when they first spot a creature 
13 alteration — a white streak forms in 

with the Fear ability. his hair, his eyes twitch constantly, or 
Success means a character manages to some other minor physical alteration 

overcome the situation and carry on. A failed manifests. 

Fear check means the unfortunate soul faces Frightened: The character gains the 

the consequences below, depending on Hesitant Hindrance for the remainder 
14-15 

of the encounter. If he already has it, 
whether the source of fear was grotesque or 

he’s Panicked instead. 
terrifying in nature: 

Panicked: The character immediately 
= NAUSEA: If the scene was grotesque or 16-17 moves his full Pace plus running die 
horrific, such as a grisly discovery or away from the danger and is Shaken. 
learning a secret “Man Was Not Meant Minor Phobia: The character gains a 
to Know,” the character is Shaken and 18-19 Minor Phobia Hindrance somehow 
Fatigued. Critical Failure means the victim associated with the trauma. 

must roll on the Fear Table as well. Major Phobia: The character gains 
20-21 

= TERROR: A terrifying trigger, such as a the Major Phobia Hindrance. 

monstrous creature or unknowable evil, Heart Attack: The hero is so over- 
is much more intense. Extras are typically whelmed with fear that his heart 

Panicked. Wild Cards must roll on the stutters. He must make an immediate 
Vigor roll at -2. If successful, he’s 

Fear Table (at +2 with a Critical Failure 22+ Stunned. If he fails, he’s Incapacitated 
on the Fear check). Roll a d20 and add the and dies in 2d6 rounds. In the latter 
monster's Fear penalty, if any, to the roll (a case, a Healing roll at —4 saves his life, 

-2 adds +2 to the roll, for example). but he remains Incapacitated. He may 
be treated normally thereafter. 

*Add the creature’s Fear penalty as a positive 
number fo this roll. 

124 



No rollis usually needed to ascend ladders 

HAZARDS or trees with sturdy limbs unless the GM 
feels there's a good reason (being chased, 

na WE a a A 
injured, etc.). 

Heat, cold, hunger, thirst, lack of sleep, 
Under stress (such as during combat 

and other hazards can wear down even 
rounds), the climber must roll Athletics to 

the hardiest of heroes, sending them into a 
make progress. Success means he moves 

downward spiral that can lead to death if they 
normally, failure means he doesn’t make 

can’t improve their situation. 
any progress that round, and a Critical 

When to Use These Rules: Hazards intro- Failure indicates a fall! If secured by a rope 
duce resource management to long trips or other restraint, he falls half the length of 
through dangerous regions. They also push the restraint and suffers Fatigue from Bumps 
the party toward critical resources like water & Bruises (see above). If unsecured, see the 
or shelter where encounters with other Falling rules on page 127. 
travelers or creatures are likely present. 

Modifiers: The GM should assign a bonus 
The other Hazards listed here, such as (+2) if the surface has numerous hand- and 

falling, poison, disease, and the like, generally footholds or the climber has good equipment. 
come up in response to a creature or situation. Assign a penalty (-1 to —4) for smooth surfaces, 
The Basics: Each Hazard is different, but lack of equipment, bad weather, etc. 

most are an attribute check made periodically 
against some dangerous effect. Failure PREPARED GLIMBS =] 

tends to cause Fatigue (page 100). Use the Break lengthy ascents like climbing mountain a 
m 

standard rules modified by any changes sides into three roughly even sections. 2 
noted in this section. Assume any falls occur at the “top” of g 

each section. < 
Im 

The GM might also consider using the 2 
Dramatic Task system (page 122) if the | 

Stumbling down a slope or running through 
surface must be ascended in a certain amount c: 

a cavern in the dark might cause numerous po 
of time — such as before weather hits, guards m 

cuts, scrapes, and bumps. 
return, etc. = 

Characters moving through injurious ) 
terrain make an Athletics roll. Those who fail © 
gain a level of Fatigue. = 

Recovery: Fatigue levels from Bumps & Trudging through deep snow for hours 8 
; 

Bruises improve one level every 24 hours on end or facing biting, bitter winds can 
instead of every hour (see Fatigue, page 100). dehydrate and tire a character as quickly as 

blazing deserts. 
A character may use the Healing skill to 

treat and cover the injuries, or medicate the For every four hours spent in weather 
patient to relieve pain at any time. Success below freezing (32° F), a character must make 

relieves one level of Fatigue from Bumps & a Vigor roll. Failure means he gains a Fatigue 
Bruises and a raise relieves two. Each healer level. Subtract 2 from the victim's Vigor roll 
may attempt this roll only once unless the GM for every 20 degrees below freezing, to a 
decides a change in circumstances warrants maximum of —4. 
another opportunity (finding medical Clothing: Subtract 2 if the character has 
supplies, for example). only light clothing. Add +2 for modern winter 

gear, or +4 for advanced gear (heated suits). 

GLIMBING Death: Incapacitated victims die after 2d6 
hours instead of waking Exhausted. 

Climbing uses the Athletics skill, and the 
basics are covered under Movement on page Recovery: Victims can only recover Fatigue 

92. When the game is in rounds, each inch once they receive adequate warmth and 
climbed takes 2" of Pace. shelter. 



Swimming up or down stream should modify 
this as the Game Master sees fit. 

(a72)  Diseases cover a wide range of maladies, from Under hazardous conditions, swimmers 
- long-term debilitating illnesses to those which must roll Athletics to move. Failure means 
[+4 
oO might cause immediate spasms or death. she makes no progress that round, and a 

Critical Failure causes a level of Fatigue. With 
S Diseases can be contracted through 
[3] various vectors, such as an airborne source, success she moves normally. 

5 ingestion, or the touch or bite of a creature 

S 
If it becomes important to know, characters 

 that causes a Wound or Shaken result. In any can hold their breath for a number of rounds 

= of these situations, the victim must make an equal to 2 plus their Vigor die, or half that if 
wn immediate Vigor roll to avoid infection. they weren't prepared for being submerged 

To handle such a diverse range of diseases, and didn’t have time to get a good breath. 
we've broken them down into three major Life Vests: Add +2 to swimming rolls if a 
categories. If you're trying to model a specific character wears a life vest. 
disease, adjust the rules presented here to Death: Incapacitated characters perish in a 
better reflect its symptoms. number of rounds equal to their Vigor die. If 
Recovery: Diseases can only be cured by someone can get to the victim before then, he 

waiting until they’ve run their course or with can be resuscitated with a Healing roll at —2. 
specific medications— whether or not those 
are available depends on the setting. ELEGTRIGITY 
The symptoms can often be treated by 

Touching or brushing up against an electrical 
common medicines, however. With a success- 

outlet or the kind of electric fence found 
ful Healing roll, a doctor, physician, shaman, 

around small farms requires a Vigor roll at 
etc., can prescribe or create a treatment. He 

-2. Success means the character is Distracted. 
may attempt to do so once per day. 

Failure means he’s Stunned. 
Each application of the treatment (pills, 

If the source was gripped (such as trying 
poultices, etc.) reduces Fatigue by one level 

to climb a fence and grabbing an electrified 
for four hours. 

wire), the muscles freeze up and the victim 
can’t let go until he makes a Vigor roll at —4 (at 
the start of each turn as a free action). 

Swimming is covered under Movement Each round the roll is failed, he takes a level 
on page 92. In still water, each inch of of Fatigue. Once Incapacitated, he lets go and 
movement on the tabletop takes 2" of Pace. no further rolls are required. 

DISEASE CATEGORIES 
TYPE EFFECT 

Includes leprosy, the final stages of tuberculosis or cancer, and similar severe maladies. 
They may result in death if left untreated. At the start of every game session, the 
character makes a Vigor roll. Failure means she’s Exhausted from spasms, coughing 

Chronic fits, or similar issues for that session. A Critical Failure means he will expire before 
the end of the session. The GM is encouraged to let heroes go out in a blaze of glory if 
possible. Success means the victim is Fatigued for the game session, and a raise means 
he gets a second wind and suffers no ill effects. 

Flus, viruses, stomach bugs and the like have various specific symptoms but generally 
Debilitating result in the character being Fatigued for 2d6 days. 

Fast-acting diseases that kill are rare in the real world but might be found on alien 
worlds or the darkest depths of forgotten dungeons. On contracting the disease, the 
hero is Fatigued. At the start of each turn thereafter, he must make a Vigor roll or suffer 

Lethal 
a Wound! (Some diseases may call for a Vigor roll more slowly, such as once per hour 
or once per day.) A successful Healing roll stops the effects only if the proper medicine 
is on hand to stop the disease. The healing power also halts the effects. 

126 



HIGH VOLTAGE 
Contact with a high voltage electrical source 
such as a military-level fence or power line If a flammable target is hit by fire (GM's call), K 
causes 4d6 damage. roll 1d6. On a 6, the target catches fire and rs 
In dramatic games, this knocks the victim immediately takes the damage listed below. m™ 
away from the fence 1d4". In more realistic Very flammable targets catch fire on a 4-6. > 

<] 
games, the victim spasms and must make a Volatile targets, such as a person soaked in 
Vigor roll at —4 each turn to let go (a free action gasoline, catch fire on a 2-6. Im 

at the start of his turn). If failed, he suffers 
the damage each turn until he manages to let FIRE DAMAGE 
go or dies. DAMAGE DESCRIPTION | 
Increase the damage to 5d6 if the victim is 1d6 Spot contact, steam - 

standing in water or in the rain. 
2d6 Bonfire, burning room l=) 

Armor: Armor doesn’t protect from © 
3d6 Flamethrower 

electrical damage unless it's specifically 
designed to do so (i.e., a rubberized suit). 5dé Lava 

Fire continues to cause damage at the 
FALLING beginning of the victim's turns. Roll a dé 
Falling damage is 1d6 +1 per 2” (4 yards), to immediately after it does so. On a 6, it grows 
a maximum of 10d6 + 10. in intensity to whatever maximum the GM 

feels is appropriate (usually 3d6 for organic 
Snow: Particularly soft ground, such as 

beings). On a 1, the fire drops a level, or burns 
very deep snow, acts as a cushion. Every foot 

out if reduced below 1dé damage. 
of soft snow reduces damage 1 point. 

A character may also make an Athletics roll 
Water: A successful Athletics roll halves 

to put out a fire on himself, others, or a flame 
damage into reasonably deep water at heights 

the size of a Medium Blast Template. This is 
of 10" (20 yards) or less. A raise negates the 

an action, plus any modifiers for intensity, 
damage entirely. Those who fall into water 

tools, the flammability of the target, etc. 
from heights greater than 20 yards take 
damage as if they'd hit solid earth. Armor: Armor protects normally unless the 

attack or hazard’s description says otherwise. 
A hero hit with a flamethrower is still better off 
if he has a Kevlar vest than not, for example. 

Flaming Weapons: Flame doesn’t cause 
extra damage but may set the target on fire. 



SMOKE INHALATION When the temperature reaches 90 degrees 
Fires in confined areas produce deadly smoke. or more, heroes must make Vigor rolls every 

[72] Each person within must make a Vigor roll four hours. Those who fail take Fatigue that 
a 
1 every round. If the roll is failed, the character can only be recovered by cooling down (see 
[4 gains a level of Fatigue. A wet cloth adds +2 Recovery, below). 
(=) 
S to the roll and a “SCBA” (firefighter’s) mask Modifiers: Subtract 1 or 2 from rolls 

negates the need for the roll entirely. made in high or extreme heat. Subtract an 
[#] 

additional 1 or 2 points if the characters 
& Death:A  person Incapacitated from smoke 

inhalation dies in a number of minutes engage in vigorous or extreme activity. 

= equal to his Vigor. If someone can get to the Heatstroke: If a character is Incapacitated 
0 victim before then, he can be resuscitated by from heat he must make another Vigor 

removing him from the hazard and a Healing roll. Success follows the usual rules for 
roll at -2. Incapacitation from Fatigue, but failure 

permanently reduces his Vigor a die type (to 

HEAT a minimum of d4). A Critical Failure on this 
roll means he perishes. 

Intense heat, typically that over 90 degrees 
Recovery: A victim must cool down some- 

Fahrenheit, can cause heat exhaustion and 
how to recover Fatigue. This usually means 

heatstroke, both of which are very dangerous. 
water, shade, air conditioning, etc. 

The actual danger is from dehydration, so 
well-supplied and conscientious characters 
can greatly improve their chances in extreme 
heat simply by carrying a good amount of Average-size humans need about 1,500 
water and drinking frequently. calories of reasonably nutritious food per 

day to avoid the effects of hunger. If sufficient 
ececeocecceceececoeeée sustenance isn’t available, a character begins 

to suffer from hunger. 
THE RULE OF THREES After 24 hours without enough food, the 

Extreme survivalists often talk about victim must make a Vigor roll. Subtract 1 if 
the “rule of threes.” All of these apply to the individual has less than half the required 
reasonably healthy individuals, of course. calories, and -2 if he has no food at all. Failure 
Those with illnesses or other infirmities means the character gains a Fatigue level. 
will fare worse. See the Survival skill, page 35, when a 

These “rules” encourage those in character wants to hunt or scrounge for food 
dangerous circumstances to prioritize, from the local environment. 

seeing to their shelter in a freezing Death: An Incapacitated character dies 
environment before worrying about water from hunger 3d6 hours later. 
and food, for example. In the game, these Recovery: The victim must have at least a 
conditions should only come into play half day’s food to recover. 
when dramatically appropriate. 
® AIR: A standard rule of survival says 
most people can survive three minutes 
without air (though they likely pass out The bane of adventurers across all Savage 
and need resuscitation after a minute). Worlds can be delivered by the smallest of 

foes— poison! 
= SHELTER: You can live for three hours 
without shelter in a harsh environment, When an adventurer comes into contact 
such as sub-zero temperatures. with poison (at least a Shaken result if an 

= WATER: You can live for three days attack) he must make an immediate Vigor roll 
minus the Strength of the poison (if listed). 

without water. 
Failure means the character is Distracted in 

= FOOD: You can live three weeks without addition to any specific effects listed below. 



= KNOCKOUT: The victim is knocked out 
(Incapacitated and unconscious) for 2d6 
hours (twice that with a Critical Failure). Most people need a minimum of six hours’ 

m LETHAL: The victim is Stunned, takes a sleep out of every 24. A character who 
Wound (two with a Critical Failure), and goes without must make a Vigor roll at a 
perishes in 2d6 rounds. cumulative 2 every 24 hours thereafter (to 

® MILD: The victim suffers Fatigue, or a maximum penalty of —4) or suffer Fatigue. 

Exhaustion with a Critical Failure. This A large amount of coffee, soda, or other 

cannot cause Incapacitation. stimulant adds +2 to the roll. 

= PARALYZING: The victim is Incapacitated 
for 2d6 minutes, or twice that with a Critical THIRST 
Failure. An average-sized human requires two quarts 
These are basicand simplified poison effects of water a day. This requirement is doubled 

that can be altered as needed to suit specific in very dry conditions (such as the desert) or 
creatures or hazards. A particularly deadly areas of heat and high humidity (the jungle) 
snake in your fantasy world, for example, as the character perspires constantly and 
might still cause Exhaustion to those who begins to dehydrate. 
resist its effects, or Fatigue with a raise. If enough water isn’t available, the hero 
Treatment: A character may make a begins to suffer from dehydration. A day 

Healing roll minus the strength of the poison after he can’t get enough water, he must make . 
(if any modifier is listed) to stop its effects. If a Vigor roll every eight hours (every four po 
this action is successful, the victim's life is hours in a very hot or humid environment). Im 

saved and the poison no longer has any ill Subtract 2 if he has less than half the water > 
=) 

eff—epacraltyzsed victims can move and he needs in that period, and —4 if he has no < 
those rendered unconscious wake. water at all. Failure incurs a level of Fatigue Im 

and Critical Failure means he’s Exhausted. 2 
Each character may only attempt one fu 

Healing roll per incident to cure the poison, See the Survival skill on page (= 
but another character with Healing may 35 when a character wants to es] 

m 
make a second attempt, and so on. search for water from the local . 

environment. Oo 

RADIATION Recovery: Characters recover o 
fe 

Fatigue levels normally after 
Characters in a radioactive 

receiving sufficient water. 8 
environment must make a Vigor - 
roll every hour spent in low Death: An individual Inca- 

radiation, and every minute pacitated by thirst perishes 
in high radiation. Each failure after 2d6 hours. 
results in a Fatigue level. 
Radiation Poisoning: An 

Incapacitated victim con- 
tracts radiation sickness, 
a Chronic Disease, as 
explained under Dis- 
ease on page 126. 

SIRS 



SPADES 

Downtime: The character spends time alone in 

Interludes are tales the players tell in-character quiet contemplation. What does she do? 

to roleplay, enhance a long travel scene, or Backstory: A great victory or personal triumph. 

reveal the secrets and backstories they've put Trek: A difficult obstacle the group negotiated 
so much effort into. along the way. 

When to Use These Rules: Interludes give HEARTS 
players a way to get to know their characters, Downtime: The hero practices a skill. What is it? 
reveal some of their backstories, and even 

Backstory: A tale of the hero's greatest love— 
add to the world you're all building together. 

lost, found, present, or waiting on her back home. 
The Basics: Players tell a story from their Trek: How the party endured a trying hardship 

character's point of view and are rewarded on the journey. 
with a Benny. 

DIAMONDS 

Downtime: The character studies or works on an 
RUNNING AN INTERLUDE object of some sort. What is it? 

When you want to give your players a Backstory: Something your hero wants or 
moment to catch their breath and get into already has. It might be a material possession, 

recognition, a political goal, or even a trip he 
character, allow those who want to take part 

wishes to take to some amazing destination. 
to draw a card from the Action Deck. The suit 
of the card gives each player three choices: Trek: How the group found something that 

helped them along the way, such as an oasis, 
Downtime, Backstory, or Trek. (If a player 

minor treasure, ammo, food, friendly locals, etc. 
draws a Joker give everyone an extra Benny 
and let them choose the suit and category!) CLUBS 

® DOWNTIME: What the hero does when left Downtime: Your hero broods or is angry 
about something. What is it, and how does she 

alone. A priest might quietly read a holy misbehave? 
text while a warrior constantly sharpens 

Backstory: A tale of misfortune from your 
his blades. hero's past, perhaps revealing something of his 

= BACKSTORY: A tale of the character's past, Hindrances or a dark secret. 

told through her voice and narration. Trek: A hardship the party overcame on their 

= TREK: The story of an obstacle or challenge trip: the tragic death of a favored Extra, spoiled or 

the party encountered on their trip. lost supplies, a mechanical breakdown, abysmal 
weather, and so on. 

REWARD 
Those players who participate in the Interlude 
receive a Benny. 



MASS BATTLES BATTLE 
 pemam | At the start of each round, the player 

Pedi characters discuss and decide on their plan. 
Many adventures feature heroes traveling 
about the land, gathering allies to thwart Next comes opposed Battle rolls by the 
some inevitable foe or loathsome horde. rival commanders. Add the modifiers below 

They build coalitions, train armies, discover as appropriate to each roll. 
powerful artifacts, and finally stand against 
the enemy in desperate and glorious battle. BATTLE MODIFIERS 

The rules presented here allow the Game MODIFIER CIRCUMSTANCE 

Master to handle everything from a small Force Bonus: The side with the 
warband holding a fort against an undead most Force Tokens adds +1 for 

horde to full divisions of troops fighting a +1 per each point of difference. If the 
pointof larger army has 10 tokens and the 

massive field battle or a planetary assault from advantage smaller one has 7, for example, the 
a space-based invasion fleet. It's abstract, but commander of the more powerful 
provides a narrative base for heroes to plan, army adds +3. 
get involved, and take part in the carnage! Tactical Advantage: Grant a +1 
When to Use These Rules: Use the Mass to +4 bonus for any special cir- 

Battle rules when you need to resolve a large cumstances that might help that 
+1 to +4 army, such as air superiority, 

conflict that can go either way, and also 
fortifications, or other conditions 

allow the player characters to have a role in not otherwise factored into the os 
its outcome. The culmination of these tales is army's strength. m 

not always a foregone conclusion, and failure 3 
Battle Plan: Add +1 to +4 if one =] 

can be just as interesting as victory! +lto+4 side has a particularly effective or = 
The Basics: Each side has a number of clever plan over the other. Im 

2 
“Force Tokens” equal to its relative strength = 
and size. Commanders roll their Battle skill RESULTS cl 

=x 
each turn. The winner reduces his rival's The winner of the opposed roll consults the m 
force until one side or the other breaks. Battle Results. Any casualties are generally =| 

distributed evenly throughout the army or 5] 
SETUP however the GM feels is most appropriate. © 

I~ 

To start, give the larger or more powerful 
BATTLE RESULTS a 

army 10 Force Tokens. Give the opposing = 
army a proportional number of tokens. If one MODIFIER RESULT 

army has 10,000 warriors, for example, and Ti Draw: Both sides lose one Force 
1e 

the other has 7,000, give the smaller army Token. 

seven tokens. These represent the troops, Marginal Victory: The victor loses 
vehicles, ships, etc., in each side’s army. Success one Force Token, the defeated 

loses two. 
Adjust the ratio as makes sense to account 

for special or elite troops, better equipment, Raise Victory: The defeated army loses 
two Force Tokens. 

and so on. If one army is half as powerful as 
another, for example, give one side 10 Force Time: A standard battle round is two hours 
Tokens and the other five. Get close enough of hard fighting. The Game Master should 
to give areasonable approximation of relative change this as suits her needs or the story. A 
strength. The dice and the players’ actions more reserved fight might have four- or even 
will handle the rest. eight-hour rounds, while a siege might be a 

battle round per day. 



Failure means the warrior fought bravely. 
After an army loses one or more Force Tokens, She takes a Wound but doesn’t add to the 

[72] its leader rolls his Spirit modified by these commander's Battle roll. A Critical Failure 
[=] 
pu circumstances: means the hero rolls on the Battle Effects 
[+4 table but also suffers d4 +1 Wounds! 
(=) MORALE MODIFIERS 
S The Game Master and players should work 

together to describe each character’s glorious 
[#] MODIFIER CIRCUMSTANCE 

scenes of bravery and carnage once the results 
& =1; Each Force Token lost so far. 

are determined. 

= I") The army is made up mostly of 
undead or other fearless troops. 

0 BATTLE EFFECTS 
The army is within fortifications or RESULT 
prepared positions. 

Inspire: The warrior battles valiantly, 
The army cannot retreat or will be inspiring the troops and urging them 
killed if it does. 2 to fight on despite their injuries. Her 

side immediately recovers one Force 
Success means he cajoles the army to fight Token. 

on. The battle continues another round (or as 
Terrorize: The fighter’s fury terrorizes 

the attacker sees fit). 
3-4 her foes. The enemy commander 

Failure means the commander loses control subtracts 2 from his Spirit roll if 

of his force. The army is defeated but conducts forced to test morale this round. 

an orderly retreat. Critical Failure means they Valor: The warrior’s Support adds 

flee the field in a reckless rout. They may 5-9 +2 to the commander's Battle roll as 

be scattered temporarily or permanently, usual. 

ridden down by the enemy, or captured as Slaughter: The foe reels at the champ- 

the GM decides. 10-11 ion’s onslaught. Subtract 2 from the 
enemy commander's Battle total. 

AFTERMATH An Army of One: Tales will be told 
and songs sung of the warrior’s epic 

When one side routs, retreats, or runs out of feats this day. The enemy army loses 
Force Tokens, the battle ends. If it's important 12 a Force Token immediately (this 
to determine the fate of named Extras or other doesn’t subtract from his Battle roll 
nonplayer characters, use the Aftermath & but does cause a morale check even 

Extras rules on page 96. if he wins). 

GHARAGTERS IN AMMO & POWER POINTS 
If it's important to track, each round a 

MASS BATTLES hero enters the fray and uses his Shooting 
Player characters can dramatically affect the or an arcane skill he expends some of his 
results of the battle. Before their commander ammunition or Power Points. 

makes his Battle roll, each player who wants Arcane types use 3d6 Power Points each 
to enter the fray describes what she’s doing round of battle. Characters with ranged 
and makes a Support roll with whatever skill weapons fire at their weapon's standard Rate 
she feels is most appropriate. (Don't forget of Fire, 2d6 times. 
that enemy champions can add to the rival The GM should alter these numbers based 
commander’s Battle roll as well!) on tactics, the length of each battle round, 
Success grants the commander +1 to his weapon types, or how long she thinks the 

Battle roll but the hero takes Fatigue from hero has to recover or rearm between rounds. 
Bumps & Bruises for her efforts. With a raise, 

Example: Gabe is in a mass battle against a 
she emerges unharmed and rolls on the Battle 

horde of xenos. His minigun’s RoF is 5 so it 
Effects table. She may choose to use the result 

fires 40 bullets per shot (see page 93). He 
rolled or give her commander the usual +2 

rolls 7 on 2d6, so Gabe uses 7 x 40 bullets, or 
bonus instead. 

280 rounds! 

132 



INTIMIDATION (THE NOT-S0-NIGE WAY] 
NETWORKING Intimidation can also be used to gather 

pa iVOaO  information, call in favors, or make demands, 
but it’s a little less savory. 

Your heroes often need to spend some time 
finding information or asking for favors. You Each attempt to “work the streets” takes 
can roleplay these encounters out, or you can several hours of threats and general 
allow them to use their skills in a “macro” unpleasantness, rousting the local populace 
sense — summing up hours of effort with a for whatever the hero needs. 
single roll. Success grants the character most of what 
Persuasion is the nice way of interacting she wants, though her victims might decide 

with one’s contacts. The flip side of the coin is to get some payback later on. A raise means 
Intimidation. Either can get the job done but she gets more info, getsit faster, or her victims 
in slightly different ways, as shown below. are too scared or otherwise preoccupied to 

plot revenge. 
When to Use These Rules: Networking 

is a good way for social characters to spend Failure means the goon doesn’t get 
their time while bookworm types are doing anything useful. A Critical Failure means 
Research. she ends the evening with a fat lip, black eye, 

or broken nose (see Bumps & Bruises, page 
The Basics: Characters use their Persuasion 

125). She can work her contacts again the 
or Intimidation to gather favors orinformation. 

next day, but they're more likely to be waiting 
As always, the GM should apply any bonuses Ea] 

for her this time! 
or penalties appropriate to the situation. a 

Busting Heads: The bruiser can improve m 

PERSUASION [THE NIGE WAY her odds by getting more violent or extreme 2 
g 

Characters use Persuasion to socialize within than usual. This alienates her contacts for a < 
their various social circles for information or week but adds +2 to the roll. Im 

2 
favors. When used in this way, Persuasion This raises the stakes as well. A simple - 

isn’t a single exchange but several hours failure means the evening ends with Bumps c 
& Bruises (page 125), and a Critical Failure po 

of networking, hobnobbing, carousing, m 
drinks, gifts, bribes, or entertaining. This bears more serious consequences. The GM 3 
might represent time at the office, a series might break the action down to an actual ) 
of meetings with important people, or (most encounter (which might be an ambush!), she 0 
commonly) an evening of dinner and drinks. might run afoul of the law, come back with = 

two levels of Fatigue from Bumps & Bruises, & 
Success grants most of what the character 

wants, though it may take a while, cost some or her questions might trigger a deadly 
money, or require a favor in return. A raise reaction from a more powerful enemy! 
either gets more of whatever he was looking 
for, or at alower cost. EXAMPLE: SAVAGE MOI0 

Failure means the hero's efforts are in vain. Gabe is a private eye in Deadlands Noir. He 
A Critical Failure means he’s cut off from that needs to find out where the Red Hand, an evil 
particular group for a while (up to the GM voodoo cult in New Orleans, has taken the 
but typically about a week). District Attorney. 
Money Talks: You can catch more flies Gabe’s Intimidation is better than his 

with honey than vinegar, the saying goes. Persuasion, and he has the Menacing Edge 
A character with a little lucre to spread that adds +2 to Intimidation rolls. Time is 
around adds +2 to her networking attempt tight so he decides to bust some heads. That 
by spending money on better bribes, gifts, or adds another +2 to his roll. With the +4 bonus 
wining and dining her contacts. he gets a success and a raise. Gabe finds 
The amount required is up to the GM where the DA is being held and how many 

the setting, and the nature of the contact(s) guards are with her as well. 
she interacts with. As a rule of thumb, use 
the setting’s Starting Funds and modify as 
appropriate from there. 



TURN ORDER & GRITIGAL AGTIONS 
QUIGK ENCOUNTERS Players can goin whatever order they want in 

[72] 
a T  a Quick Encounter. This might be important 
1 if some of their actions are dependent on 
[4 “Sometimes the Game Master may want to 

someone else’s. In a heist, for example, the 
o quickly sum up an encounter rather than 
S group might depend on the hacker to shut 

track every action round by round. “Quick 
down a company’s security measures before 

[2] Encounters” resolve these kinds of situations 
they can break in. Similarly, the crew of a B-17 

& with good collaborative storytelling, 
in Weird War Two might need the navigator to 

= tension, and risk. 
get them to the mission location before they 

wn When to Use These Rules: Use Quick can fend off enemies and bomb a target. 
Encounters when you're pressed for time, 

Resolve these kinds of actions in the order 
the group isn’t as interested in tactical fights, 

that makes sense, and allow those who 
or they do something the GM isn’t prepared 

come after to change their own plans as the 
for, like infiltrating a large complex she 

situation changes. 
hasn't detailed. 

If a critical task is failed, the GM must 
The Basics: Characters make a skill roll 

decide if it stops the encounter or simply 
based on the type of encounter and their goal 

complicates it (perhaps inflicting a penalty 
and interpret the results narratively with the 

to everyone else’s roll). In the heist example 
Game Master. 

above, for example, maybe the hacker does 
break in but alerts the guards, inflicting 

ENGOUNTER TYPES a —2 penalty to Stealth or combat rolls and 
No Action Cards are dealt in a Quick possibly turning the operation deadly. In the 
Encounter. Instead, the GM describes the Weird War Two example, the navigator might 
scene, then the players agree on a general still get them to the location but arrives just as 
plan and what each of their characters will do. the enemy fighters respond and make things 

more difficult. 
Once everyone states their intent, they can 

pick the skill that best represents their actions These kinds of complications might also 
during the encounter. mean resolving the encounter in multiple 

stages instead of one roll as the heroes must 
Here are some examples: 

react to the changing circumstances (see 
= CHASE: Common Knowledge (for navi- Staged Encounters, below). 
gation), Driving, Repair, Shooting. 

® COMBAT: Fighting, Shooting, arcane skill. STAGED ENCOUNTERS 
® CRISIS: Athletics, Persuasion (to calm Quick Encounters are typically a single die 
bystanders), Repair. roll followed by some narration between the 

GM and the players. But some encounters 
= HEIST: Hacking, Notice, Stealth, Thievery. 

might need additional rounds to better reflect 
= MISSION: Battle, Boating, Fighting, the results or any new information or events 
Persuasion, Piloting, Shooting. that come to light. 

ms TREK: Common Knowledge, Notice, If the heist to break into a pawn shop and 
Survival. steal a powerful occult artifact goes badly, 
Modifiers: The GM should assign modifiers for example, the next stage might become a 

based on the situation. If the heroes greatly crisis when the shop suddenly bursts into 
outnumber their opposition, pursue much supernatural flames. That might then lead to 
slower prey, have prior experience with the a combat encounter as an artifact in the shop 
obstacles in their path, or special equipment breaks and releases an angry djinn! 
to deal with hazards, the roll might be made The beauty of staged encounters is their 
at +1 to +4. ability to handle complex problems when the 
Very difficult encounters, such as powerful constraints of time or larger narrative require 

foes (relative to the party), faster prey, or a speedy resolution. 
extreme conditions inflict a —1 to —4 penalty. 

134 



If they can try again, the GM should “reset” 
ENGOUNTER RESULTS the encounter with the new narrative so the 

Once each player has determined her skill group has to come up with a new plan. And 
and any modifiers, she rolls the dice and of course, their foes are likely on to them now! 

works with the Game Master to narrate the 
details based on the total, the situation, and AMMO & POWER POINTS 
the other players’ actions. Use the rules for Ammo & Power Points 

under Mass Battles (page 131) for combat 
DANGEROUS ENCOUNTERS encounters if desired. Otherwise the player 
If a character fails his roll in a dangerous and GM can just decide what resources were 
situation he takes a Wound (or d4 Wounds consumed in the encounter. 
with a Critical Failure). If he’s the driver of a 
vehicle, it takes a Wound (or d4 with a Critical EXAMPLE: NIGHT AT 
Failure). Wounds may be Soaked as usual. THE MUSEUM 

Success means the hero emerges with only 
Bumps & Bruises (page 125), and a raise Red and Gabe must break into a museum, 

means he escapes unscathed. steal an ancient book, and stop a global 
conspiracy that threatens all of humanity. 

NONLETHAL ENGOUNTERS The group decides to play out the break-in 
If the encounter isn’t physically dangerous, as a Quick Encounter. Red plans to use 
failure means the hero doesn’t contribute to Thievery to break into the museum, take the —] 

the party’s overall success somehow. Critical manuscript, then escape out the back. Gabe a 
m 

Failure means she suffers social stigma, will Support her using Hacking as she runs 2 
loses or breaks a piece of vital equipment, into trouble. g 
is positively identified, or gets the wrong The GM decides Red’s Thievery roll is at < 
information. This likely means moving on to Im 

-2 to get into the museum. Gabe tries to turn 2 
a second stage of the encounter as she deals off cameras and unlock security doors as - 

with the fallout of her errors. she goes, Supporting her Thievery roll with c 
=x 

Hacking. He gets one success and adds +1 to m 
SUGGESS & FAILURE his friend's roll. =] 

In general, narration and individual actions 
Red manages a single success, but since ) 

determine the success or failure of an © 
there are two player characters and the rules 

encounter. If the hacker can’t get past a | 
say they need at least as many successes as 

building's security measures, forexample, and 8 
there are characters, they fail. = 

the GM decides it shuts down the operation 
rather than complicating it, the encounter The GM says several night watchmen 
fails. In other words, let the story tell the tale. are alerted by the pair's actions and begin 

prowling through the museum. Red and 
In amore dynamic situation such as combat, 

Gabe can continue if they want, but the 
assume the group “wins” if there are at least 

encounter is now more difficult (-2). The GM 
as many total successes (one for each success 

also says it’s now “dangerous” as the guards 
and raise) as there are player characters. 

are armed and nervous. 
They get the information, drive off their foes, 
complete the mission, or avert (or escape) the With the fate of the world at stake, the heroes 

crisis. Support rolls don’t count as successes. agree to press on. Red now uses Stealth to 
avoid the guards. Gabe gives up on Hacking, 

If there are fewer successes than player 
borrows some clothing from a passing tourist, 

characters, they fail. Specifics are up to the 
and knocks on the door, pretending to be lost! 

Game Master, but might mean the party has 
The GM tells him to use Performance and he 

to fall back or retreat from their foes, their 
rolls a 21! Both characters are successful, so 

prey escapes, they don’t get the object or 
the ancient manuscript is secured! 

data they were looking for, they survive the 
crisis but can’t save most of the bystanders, 
and so on. ot LUD HE HARA 

Hl” 

GHz. Mice Touct 
—Rev



 SETIING RULES Conviction tokens aren't Bennies and 
can’t be used as such. They are kept between 

[72] 
> prs 

sessions, but a player can never have more 
[=] - 

4 EE 
pu than one at a time. 
[4 Savage Worlds range from dark and gritty 
(=) detective tales to cinematic epics to political TRIUMPH AND TRAGEDY 
= thrillers. These rules provide a great Conviction is granted for personal triumph 
[2] framework for anything you want to do, but and tragedy, drawing on a character's entire 
& adding the right Setting Rules really brings background, including — but not limited to — 

= the world and the action to life! his Edges and Hindrances. 

0 When to Use These Rules: Setting Rules Savage settings may also grant Conviction 
accommodate different play styles and help for certain world-specific actions or events. 
emulate genres or tropes of established 

Triumph: Characters gain Conviction 
settings — like those ofa book or movie that’s 

when they overcome significant obstacles 
inspired you. This lets you easily tweak the 

core to their overall goals and motivations. 
rules to make a gritty crime drama more 

This might mean defeating powerful enemies, 
bloody, or an adventurous space romp 

saving a true love, or overcoming some great 
more fu— nall without changing the core 

mystery or problem. 
of the game. 

The victory should be an achievement 
The Basics: Each Setting Rule is different. 

over and above the usual. A vampire hunter 
Some apply during character creation while 

in Rippers shouldn't get Conviction every 
others tweak combat, skills, or even 

time he kills a vampire, for example, but 
Benny use in some way. 

he might when he wipes out 
an entire coven or slays 

BORN A HERD a powerful master 
Heroes may ignore the Rank vampire. A super hero 
qualifications for Edges during might gain Conviction 
character creation. They must when she saves her true 

still meet any other Require- love from a death trap or the 
ments as usual. The usual clutches of a powerful villain. 
rules for Rank Requirements She wouldn't earn it just 
apply afterward. because her boyfriend is in a 

dangerous encounter. 

GONVIGTION Tragedy: Some of the most 
interesting heroes of fiction, film, and 

Conviction is a special award legend spend as much time battling 
granted when a character their personal demons as they do 
experiences a great victory fighting their foes. Eventually these 
or catastrophic misfortune. If same issues give them strength 
possible, use a themed token as they work through their grief 
to note the award; maybe a or overcome obstacles to rise 
Marshal's Badge for Deadlands, once more against the challenges 
a Benny of a different color, a 1 / they face. 
toy doubloon for 50 Fathoms, A 

When a character experiences 
and so on. 

a significant personal loss or 
Conviction can be spent destructive event, and the GM 

to add a dé to a final Trait feels it’s appropriate, he gains 
or damage total. This die Conviction. The death of a loved 
can Ace, and its result is one or close friend (including 
added to the final total. a party member he was close 

to), losing an important 
job, giving in to harmful 



character flaws and vices, being removed from 
a case or quest, or getting framed for a crime GREATIVE COMBAT 
are all classic examples of heroic tragedy. Tests make a game even more exciting and 
These might happenin the course of the game, memorable. Creative Combat enhances a 

but players should also proactively suggest pulp-style game with additional benefits for 
their own ideas to the Game Master. Consider those who Test with a raise. 
your hero's backstory and occasionally look A successful Test (page 108) works as 
for ways to do what your favorite authors usual, but if a Wild Card character succeeds 
do to their characters — torture them! Think with a raise while in combat, her foe is not 
about what's important to them and threaten automatically Shaken — she rolls on the 
it or take it away. Most of the time this should Creative Combat table instead: 
be done as a quick narrative tale or a scene 
with a little interaction and roleplaying so as CREATIVE COMBAT 
not to distract from the main campaign or the 

RESULT 
other players’ time, but occasionally it might 
inspire a side-trek or adventure to regain — or Second Wind: The foe's reaction gives 

your hero hope or allows her to catch 
avenge! — whatever was lost. 

her breath. She may remove a level of 
Note that earning Conviction for harmful Fatigue or a Wound (her choice). If 

behavior is motivation for players in a game she doesn’t have Fatigue or Wounds, 

to occasionally spotlight their character's dark the enemy is Shaken instead. 

side. Itis nof anendorsement or rationalization Inspiration: Fate favors the bold. The = 
of poor conduct in the real world. clever hero receives a Benny. a 

m 
Double Whammy: The target is both 2 

EXAMPLE: RED'S RAGE Distracted and Vulnerable. g 
Shaken: The foe is Shaken. < 

Emily is Red, a fighter in a fantasy campaign. Im 
She has “anger management issues” but Setback: The target suffers a setback 2 

of some sort. She might fall off a | 

didn’t take the Mean Hindrance because she’s ledge, lose the confidence of her c: 
had her problem under control for a year or minions (who then desert her), take =x 

9-10 m 
so. But it's a fun part of her backstory and a rash but foolish action, or simply 

Emily loves roleplaying constantly managing lose her next action as she attempts to = 
her character’s temper. recover from whatever situation she ) 

finds herself in. © 
Unfortunately, Red and her constant ally ~ 

Insight: The hero has new insight 
Gabe failed in their last adventure. Emily 8 

into the target's nature. Once during 
decides this is a good time for Red to go on = 

this encounter, she may add +d6 to 
a rampage. She narrates a story about going 11 any Trait roll made to directly attack, 

into town and terrorizing everyone in sight affect, or damage the same foe. If 

with her surly attitude. During the course of rolled a second time in the same 
encounter, the foe is Shaken instead. 

a “bad day,” she breaks a window, turns over 
an apple cart, and even insults a friar’s mule! Seize the Moment: After the hero 

resolves this turn, she immediately 
The GM loves Emily’s story and awards her gets an entire additional turn. This 

12 
with a point of Conviction. In the game, Red includes movement as well! She may 

is barred from the local tavern, has to pay for use the turn to go on Hold if she 

all the damage she caused, and is refused help wishes. 

by the friar (the town’s only healer!) until she 
performs some act of penance (a new quest!) 

More importantly, Emily told a story about «oul Fun! THIS CAN MALE 
her heroine’s tragic flaw— and has a point 
of Conviction to carry her through the next THINGS REALL W wol” 
chapter of her quest. ~The 6M 



DYNAMIC BACKLASH 
DUMB LUGK 2D6 EFFECT 
Dumb Luck allows a player to spend a Benny Catastrophe: Something goes terribly 
even after a Critical Failure. The failure still wrong. The GM must decide what, but 
happens in some way, but the character can some ideas are a new and permanent 
spend one Benny (and only one) for one Minor Hindrance, the inability to use 

more roll. The hero still drops her weapon, powers for several days, or an explosion 
of some sort. The backlash should be 

flubs her Taunt, or otherwise “fails” the 
thematicif possible. If the hero tampers 

attempt—  but if the reroll from the Benny is 2 with dark forces for his abilities, for 
actually successful, it somehow still results in example, he might become corrupted 
whatever success the new roll provides. or summon something sinister into 

the world. If he's a weird scientist the 
A character trying to pick a lock might break device might explode for 3d6 damage 

the lock on a Critical Failure, for example, but in a Medium Blast Template, or he 
only after cracking the lock. Or a warrior who might develop a Quirk, Phobia, or other 

fumbles a Fighting roll might hit a foe as if “madness.” 

he’d thrown the weapon! Backfire: The power succeeds as with a 

The player and Game Master should work raise but affects a different target with 
the worst possible results. A bolt hits a 

together to describe the scene in some fun or random friend, boost Trail increases an 
bizarre way that explains how the mishap enemy's skill or attribute, etc. If there's 
ultimately results in success. no likely target, he’s Stunned instead. 

If the power has a Duration other than 
Example: Red fires three shots from her Instant, it lasts its full term and can only 
submachine gun (Rate of Fire 3). She rolls be negated by dispel (the caster can’t 
a 1 on her Wild Die and two of her Shooting voluntarily end it herself). 

dice —a Critical Failure! The GM decides the Short Circuit: The power fails but the 
stidden recoil makes her drop her gun. Power Points allocated to it are spent, 

Red’s player, Emily, calls on Dumb Luck and along with an additional 1d6 Power 

spends a Benny. The reroll results in two hits Points. 

(one with a raise!). The GM says the weapon Stunned: The caster is Stunned (see 

bounces on the ground and sprays randomly, page 106). She subtracts 2 from arcane 
6-8 skill rolls for the rest of the encounter 

hitting two of Red's foes! (the penalty remains 2 even if she gets 
this result again). 

OYNAMIG BAGKLASH Overload: The character's synapses 
crackle and overload with power. He 

A Critical Failure on an arcane skill check 9-10 takes 2d6 damage plus the cost of the 
results in Fatigue (described on page 150). power in Power Points, including any 

That works well in traditional fantasy settings Power Modifiers the player declared. 

or worlds where magic is relatively common. 11 Fatigue: The character suffers Fatigue. 

If you feel magic should come with a higher Overcharge: The power draws ambient 
price, however, use this table instead. energy from the air, automatically suc- 

12 : ; y : 
Note that arcane devices Malfunction ceeding against the target with a raise 

and costing the caster no Power Points! 
(page 153) and cause a roll on the Dynamic 
Backlash table. FANATICS 
Example: Gabe is a techno-sorceror in some far- 
flung science fiction werld. He rolls a Critical Use this rule in pulp-style games where 

henchmen are numerous and villains are 
Failure when casting lower Trait against an 

larger than life. 
enemy's Agility. Gabe’s player rolls Backfire on 
the Dynamic Backlash table so it affects his When a Wild Card enemy character is hit 
friend Red instead. by a successful attack and the GM thinks it's 

Red's Agility suddenly drops two die types, appropriate, one of his henchmen, goons, or 
forcing the warrior to go on the defensive until other allies jumps in front of his master and 
the power wears off. takes the attack instead. 

138 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



A Shaken character who's Shaken a second 
FAST HEALING time (from damage) receives a Wound as 

Wild Cards make natural healing rolls once usual but does not roll on the Injury Table. 
per day instead of every five days (or once per Example: Gabe is a Hellfighter (soldier) 
hour if the race has Regeneration). during Weird War One. He takes a Wound 
Bumps & Bruises: Wild Cards recover one from a German sniper and rolls on the Injury 

level of Fatigue from Bumps & Bruises (page Table. He rolls a 10— Leg. The GM rolls a die 
125) every four hours instead of the usual 24. and decides it's the left leg, so he has the Slow 

(Minor) Hindrance. If he takes another Wound 

GRITTY DAMAGE to that leg, the Hindrance becomes Major. 
Further Wounds to the same leg add to his 

This variation on damage works well for Wound total as usual but have no further effect. 
settings such as gritty detective scenarios or Later, Gabe takes two Wounds to the Guts. 
“realistic” military adventures. It can be very The Game Master rolls once and gets the 
lethal so use it cautiously. Battered result from the Injury Table, reducing 
Whenever a Wild Card takes a Wound, roll the Sarge’s Vigor from d8§ to d6. Gabe now has 

on the Injury Table and apply the results three Wounds and two gruesome injuries. 
immediately (but roll only once per incident 
regardless of how many Wounds are actually 
caused).A hero who takes two Wounds from HARD GHOIGES 
an attack, for example, rolls once on the Use this rule for more dramatic and gritty | 
Injury Table. games. The GM and her Wild Card characters Wo 

m 
Injuries sustained in this way are cured don’t start with Bennies, but every time the 

when the Wound is healed. Injuries sustained players spend one it goes into her pool where 
via Incapacitation may be temporary or it can be used for any of her characters. If this 
permanent as usual. rule is in play, Jokers no longer grant Bennies rm 

to either side. 

o 

[= 



It's up to the GM if this makes sense in her 
HEROES NEVER DIE particular setting. A futuristic but “savage” 

[72] Heroes in movies very rarely die. When they world of planetary romance probably doesn’t 
a 
1 do, they go down fighting or perform one last, need it, but it works well for most anything 
[4 epic act of heroism. set in the developed world from about 1950 
o on, hard scifi, or “exploration” scifi like The 
= With this rule in play, Wild Cards 

Last Parsec. 
[#] Incapacitated from damage roll make a 

& Vigor roll as usual but treat Critical Failures 
as regular failures and ignore the rules for MULTIPLE LANGUAGES 

= Bleeding Out. Some settings feature characters and cultures 
0 How a hero might survive what should be who typically speak many different languages. 

certain death is a chance to get creative. An If this Setting Rule is in play, all characters 
adventurer who falls from a towering cliff, have the Linguist Edge for free (page 40), 
for example, might land in a pool of water and ignore its usual Requirements. 
or crash through the branches of a forest A character who actually takes the Linguist 
far below. Edge knows a number of languages equal to 

If the situation is particularly heroic or if her Smarts (instead of half her Smarts). 
it serves as a major story point, the GM and 
player can decide the character perishes. A NO POWER POINTS 
hero who confronts a massive demon on a 
crumbling bridge, for example, might take Instead of using Power Points, characters 

the fiend with him with his final blow. with Arcane Backgrounds simply choose 
the power they want to activate and make an 

Villains: The reverse is also true — villains 
arcane skill roll. The penalty to the roll is the 

rarely die either! Heroes should play this 
power’s total cost in Power Points (base cost 

in the spirit it’s intended — they shouldn't 
plus all Modifiers), divided by 2. Round up. 

attempt to cause some sort of gruesome and 
undeniable death to a villain who falls into Casting protection (1 point) with More 
their hands, for example. They should instead Armor (+1) and the Hurry modifier (+1), for 
turn the captive over to the authorities — even example, has a cost of 3 Power Points. Half 
though they know full well he will eventually rounded up is 2. 
escape to plague them once again. Success means the power activates as usual. 

A raise grants any additional bonuses stated 

HIGH ADVENTURE in its description. 
Failure means all current powers are 

Characters can spend a Benny to gain the 
canceled and the caster is Shaken. Critical 

one-time use of a Combat Edge. They have 
Failure results in Backlash (page 150). 

to meet the Rank and any Edge requirements 
as usual but can ignore Trait requirements. Maintaining Powers: Characters can main- 
Multiple Bennies can be spent in one round tain those powers that allow it as long as 
for multiple Edges, either for different effects desired, but each one maintained inflicts a —1 

or in order to meet a needed requirement to to all further arcane skill rolls. 
gain another Edge. Power Preparation: A caster may prepare 

powers by concentrating for an entire round 

MORE SKILL POINTS (no movement or other actions and avoid 
Disruption (page 150). If successful, he 

Thanks to technology and improved ignores 2 points of penalties on all powers 
education, characters in modern and cast on his next turn. If he does not enact any 
futuristic settings have 15 skill points at powers on his next turn, the preparation is lost. 
character creation rather than 12. This helps 
them take Driving, Electronics, and other 
skills common in the modern world. 



SKILL SPECIALIZATION UNARMORED HERD 
Savage Worlds skills are intended to be broad, Pulp action tales often feature heroes with 
allowing characters to focus primarily on little or no armor defeating far more heavily 
Edges for customization rather than multiple armored adversaries. 
iterations of something like Fighting for edged In these settings, if a Wild Card chooses not 
weapons, Fighting for blunt weapons, etc. to wear any armor (ignoring shields), he adds 

If it’s important to have more detail for +2 bonus to his Soak rolls! 
some reason, the GM can decide some skills 
require specialization. A character chooses WOUND GAP 
one particular use of that skill to roll normally, 
and subtracts 2 from the total when using it Use this Setting Rule when you want combat 
in any other way. to remain dangerous but reduce the chances 

of characters (and villains!) dying from a 
Gaining an additional specialization counts 

single lucky blow. It can still happen, but it 
as raising a skill below its linked Attribute. So 

is far more rare. 
a character can gain two new specializations 
with an Advance, or mix and match to gain Characters can never suffer more than four 

a specialization and increase a skill below its Wounds in a single hit and therefore never 
linked Attribute. have to Soak more than four wounds either. 

Below are skills appropriate for this extra Large Creatures: The Wound Cap applies 
detail and some example specializations: even to creatures with more than three 

Wounds (due to their Scale or the Resilient/ 
® BOATING: Powered, Sail, Steam. 

Very Resilient Special Ability, both explained 
=m DRIVING: Hover, Tracked, Wheeled. 

in Chapter Six). A Huge creature that can 
= FIGHTING: Axe, Blunt Weapon, Exotic 

take five Wounds, for example, can’t take 
(such as nunchaku; each is separate), Long 

more than four from a single attack, so it 
Blade, Pole Arm, Short Blade. 

can’t normally be killed with a single attack. 
= PILOTING: Fixed Wing, Rotary, Space. 

The GM can always overrule this in specific 
m RIDING: Camel, Horse, Dragon. 

and obvious situations, of course, such as 
® SCIENCE: Biology, Chemistry, Engineering. 

massive blasts, falling from towering cliffs or 
= SHOOTING: Bows, Pistol, Rifle, Shotgun. 

mountains, etc. 
® SURVIVAL: Arctic, Desert, Temperate. 



SETTING RULE GHEGKLIST 
Use the following list to choose the Setting Rules for your game, coloring in the dots so 
everyone in the group knows which rules are in effect. . 
O BORN A HERO: Player characters ignore Rank requirements for Edges during 

character creation. 
O CONVICTION: Heroes gain Conviction Tokens that can be used to add ad6 to a Trait or 

damage roll. Conviction is awarded for triumph (overcoming a great obstacle important 
to that character), and tragedy (a personal setback, death of a friend or ally, etc). 

O CREATIVE COMBAT:A  raise on a Test allows the character to roll on a special table that 
grants additional effects. 

O DUMB LUCK: Characters may spend a Benny after a Critical Failure, allowing another 
chance for success in unusual and unexpected ways. 

O DYNAMIC BACKLASH:A  Critical Failure on an arcane skill roll forces the player to roll 
on a special table with various chaotic results. 

O FANATICS: Enemy thugs take the damage for their masters. 
O FAST HEALING: Characters make natural healing rolls once per day instead of every 

five days, and recover a level of Fatigue from Bumps & Bruises every four hours instead 
of every day. 

O GRITTY DAMAGE: When Wild Cards take a Wound, they roll on the Injury Table and 
apply the results. 

O HARD CHOICES: The GM's characters only get Bennies when the heroes spend theirs. 
O HEROES NEVER DIE: Heroes and named villains rarely actually die but return in some 
way after being defeated. 

O HIGH ADVENTURE: Spend a Benny to gain the one-time use of a Combat Edge. 
O MORE SKILL POINTS: Player characters in advanced or specialized settings start with 

15 skill points. : 
O MULTIPLE LANGUAGES: Characters know half their Smarts die type in different 

languages at dé. 
O NO POWER POINTS: Those with arcane backgrounds don’t track Power Points but 

instead subtract half the listed Power Point cost (round up) from their skill roll to 
activate the ability. Powers may be maintained as desired at a —1 penalty to all-further 
arcane skill rolls. 

O SKILL SPECIALIZATION: Characters choose a specialization for each skill and subtract 
2 when using other variations. 

O UNARMORED HERO: Wild Cards without armor add +2 to their Soak rolls. 
O WOUND CAP: Wild Cards never suffer more than four wounds from a single hit. 

Tie 6M 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



impassioned roleplaying might add +1 to +4. 

SOGIAL GONFLIGT An insult or faux pas inflicts a similar penalty. 

jr SEM. - Pad Sm pl Hindrances should also be considered. 
Convincing a jury that an Outsider (Major) 

Not every conflict is won by the blade. 
is innocent of a crime, for example, carries a 

Successful oratory can topple nations. 
-2 penalty. 

When to Use These Rules: Most social 
exchanges are a simple skill roll resisted by RESULTS 
the appropriate Trait, such as Intimidation or At the end of the third round, the speaker 
Persuasion vs. Spirit. For longer interactions, looks up her total Influence Tokens on the 
such as the back and forth ofa long argument, Social Conflict Results table below. 
negotiation, or a legal proceeding, the 

Trials: Run trials and similar conflicts 
following system adds some drama and 

from the accuser’s point of view since they 
structure to each side's discussion. (The GM 

must usually prove the accused's guilt. If 
might use a Dramatic Task instead if the 

the player characters are the defenders, they 
argument must be won in a hurry!) 

oppose the prosecution and must keep them 
The Basics: Characters make arguments from gaining Influence Tokens with the judge 

back and forth over three rounds, roll their (baron, king, warlord, etc.). 
appropriate skills, then consult the Conflict 

Accusers in a trial must get at least four 
Results table (Below) to see how well they've 

tokens to convict. Lesser or greater results 
influenced their audience. 

indicate the degree of punishment based on = 
the setting’s customs and laws. 

GONFLIGT ROUNDS m 
i 

The conflictis broken down into three rounds EXAMPLE: TO ARMS! g 
< 

of conversation, each focusing on a particular 
Red must convince a baron to send troops Im 

point (or a few highly connected points). Z 
to the defense of a neighboring fiefdom. The = 

During each round, the player roleplays her barony has warred with his neighbor for = 
character's argument and makes a Persuasion generations so the GM decides that’s a —4 x 

m 
roll opposed by the Spirit of whoever she’s penalty to Red's Persuasion rolls. 
trying to convince. If a rival argues against her, = 

Worse, she’s opposed by his slimy wizard, 0 
the roll is opposed by his Persuasion instead. 

who argues against the idea every round (he o 
Each success and raise by the petitioner tr 

opposes her Persuasion rolls). 
grants her an “Influence Token” (rivals don’t A 

Red gets lucky the first round and gets 
gain tokens, they just oppose the petitioner = 

a success and raise. That's two Influence 
and keep her from gaining them). 

Tokens. She fails on the second, but gets one 
Modifiers: Persuasion rolls should be modi more in the third. 

fied by the situation as the GM sees fit. A hero 
That's three tokens in total. The baron 

trying to convince a scientist of a fact within 
agrees but requires payment in land from 

his field rolls the lowest of his Persuasion or 
his neighbor in return for sending part of his 

Science. A particularly brilliant argument or 
army to his rival's defense. 

SOCIAL CONFLICT RESULTS 
TOKENS RESULTS 

0 Pleas are denied and negotiations fail. Discussions may reopen if new information is 
presented or favors are performed. In a trial, the defendant is acquitted. 

The target isn’t truly convinced, but provides the minimum amount of support possible. In 
1:3 a trial, the defendant receives the minimum penalty. 

The arbiter is reasonably convinced or willing to help. He grants the aid requested, more or 
4-5 less, but only under certain conditions or in exchange for payment, tasks, favors, etc. The 

prosecution is successful with typical sentencinign  a trial. 

or The target is eager to help or agree. He gives more than expected in a negotiation or provides 
more support than requested. A defendant is convicted with the maximum penalty. 



TRAVEL ENGOUNTERS 
[72] If an area is dangerous or lawless, draw a 
[=] 
pe ar card from the Action Deck once per day (or 
[4 Many epic tales feature trips across great 

even two or three times a day in particularly 
[®) expanses. Adventurers might endure a long 
S dangerous areas). A face card or higher 

voyage across the endless seas of 50 Fathoms 
represents an encounter, and the card suit can 

[2] or ride the dusty trails of Deadlands: The 
be used to determine the type. 

& Weird West. 
Draw twice more if the card is a Joker and 

= Below are some guidelines to help you 
combine the results — such as Enemies and an 

0 figure out how long these journeys take 
Obstacle or Strangers and Treasure. 

and what dramatic events might happen 
along the way. Game Masters are highly encouraged to 

customize encounters based on their setting. 
When to Use These Rules: If it doesn’t 

matter how long the trip takes, skip all this. = SPA— DENEEMIESS: Monsters, enemies, or 

Narrate the journey, maybe do an Interlude hostile beasts bar the way. Perhaps they lie 

(page 130), and get to the next scene. If you in ambush if it's a popular path, waiting for 

need to know how long the trip takes, or want the next band of unwary travelers. 

to insert an obstacle or encounter of some sort, = HEARTS —STRANGERS: The group comes 
use the information below as a guideline. upon neutral or friendly nonplayer charac- 
The Basics: The mode of travel determines ters such as merchants, lost travelers, a 

how many miles the group makes per day. guide, or even other adventurers. 
= DIAMONDS —TREASURE: Somewhere 

TRAVEL TIMES along the way is something of value — the 
hulk of a crashed ship with some remaining 

The rates below assume reasonable terrain supplies waiting to be scavenged, a cache 
and weather. Difficult conditions can of useful or valuable minerals, or a magic 
drastically decrease progress (or increase it item for sale or guarded by someone or 
in the case of sailing with strong winds). something. 

AVERAGE TRAVEL TIMES u CL—UOBSBTACSLE: The heroes encounter 
an obstacle of some kind and must figure 

TRANSPORT MILES/8 HOUR DAY out how to circumvent it. Some examples 
Foot 24 are a flooded river, minefields, a decaying 

Horse 30 rope bridge, whirlpool, etc. The obstacle 

Early Car 200 might also be defended by creatures or 
enemies as well. 

Modern Car 400 

Sailing Ship* 30 

Steam Ship* 40 
Red and Gabe are wasteland warriors in 

Steam Train 60 
Deadlands: Hell on Earth, traversing an area 

Modern Passenger Train 400 outside of Las Vegas, Nevada, that's been 
Prop Plane 1,000 blasted by nuclear “ghost rock” bombs. 
Commercial Jet 4,000 The GM draws a Jack of Clubs and decides 

the area is now a maze of jagged “glass 
*Sailing ships (and steam ships to a lesser degree) chasms” and toxic sinkholes. This slows 
are greatly affected by currents and winds. progress to a crawl for two days and makes 
Strong winds or currents in the right direction them both roll for Fatigue from heat and 
allow them to travel about 60 miles per day. Poor radiation (see the Hazards section, page 125). 
winds or going against the current reduces them 

The GM draws again later that day and gets 
to 20 miles per day or less. 

a Queen of Spades. From one of the sinkholes 
slithers a swarm of irradiated serpents, 
hungry for fresh prey. 

144 



POOR OR RICH GHARAGTERS 
Wealth is only permanently increased by 

ol JER dal pin Rewards or the Rich Edge. It's decreased 
through use and the Poverty Hindrance. 

The fight against evil can sometimes be 
Those with the Poverty Hindrance have a d4 

expensive! The system here makes managing 
Wealth. Rich characters have a d8, and Very 

money in the game a bit easier and occasion- 
Rich heroes have a d10. 

ally dramatic. 
Heroes with the Fame Edge add +1 to their 

When to Use These Rules: Use the Wealth 
Wealth rolls or +2 if therye Famous. Not only 

system if you want a quick and easy way of 
do they tend to have more money, but people 

handling financial resources without tracking 
love to give discounts to celebrities. 

actual currency. 
The Basics: Characters have a new statistic SUPPORT ROLLS 

called Wealth they can use to buy things. Other characters may Support a hero's 
It increases when theyre rewarded and Wealth roll, but assume the same risks as 
decreases after significant purchases. the buyer (losing a die type in Wealth with 

success, for example). 

BUYING THINGS 
Each character has a dé in Wealth, which AVAILABILITY 
represents average, middle class resources If an item isn't commonly available, finding it Ea] 
for the setting. This isn’t a Trait, but acts on the black market, via a private dealer, or in a 
like one — players may spend Bennies when an internet chat room requires the Research m 
checking it, get their Wild Die, and benefit skill or Networking (page 133). 2 
from allies” Support. g 

The GM can also simply decide the item < 
When a hero wants to buy something isn’t available or she can assign a modifier to Im 

mundane, she does so — no roll is required. If 2 
the hero's roll as she sees fit. Finding a firearm po 

the item is more than about $10 x her Wealth in modern-day Europe, for example, is at c: 
die, or she’s made numerous recent trivial least a —4 penalty, with serious consequences po 

m 
purchases, she must make a Wealth roll. The if the roll is failed. 
GM should add bonuses for savings or deals, = 

) 
subtract penalties for expensive purchases, or REWARDS © 
rule out all-together purchases beyond the = 
character's means. Getting paid for a job or finding treasure & 

increases the characters’ Wealth die one step for wl 
Critical Failure means the buyer can’t 

scrape up the needed funds at the moment anaverage task, two for a particularly lucrative 
but may try again the next week, or after he reward, or three for a very great reward. 
obtains one or more Rewards (see below). Rewards and cost of living are relative, so 
With a regular failure, the buyer can either the increase lasts only for a month of game 
forgo the expense or she can buy it but goes time or until the GM thinks the party's 
broke regardless of her Wealth die (see below). lifestyle, carousing, or general living expenses 

Success means she purchases the item but restores it to normal. 

her Wealth is reduced a die type until the 
GM feels her finances are restored by time 
or Rewards. A raise means she buys the item NEGOTIATING 
without reducing her Wealth. Players love to negotiate with those who 

hire them, but an increase in cash rarely 
GOING BROKE means anything in actual gameplay. Using 
If a hero’s Wealth would be reduced below d4, this system means a successful negotiation, 
she’s dead broke. She has basic food, water, as well as bounties and rewards, gives 
and shelter (unless the GM and the situation them a tangible bonus to their finances. 
dictate otherwise), but otherwise can’t buy 

At least for a while! 
luxury foods, transportation, or even ammo. 






CHAPTER FIV 

Most Savage Worlds settings feature “magic” and Game Master can decide if there's a 
in one form or another. Whether it’s hidden narrative reason for this (a cleric is given a 
occult lore practiced only by dark cultists, revelation, a wizard finds an old spellbook) 
voodoo rituals, the eldritch sorcery of or it’s simply an evolution of her abilities. 
powerful wizards, weird gadgets created = POWER POINTS: The number of Power 
by mad scientists, super powers, or brain- Points the character starts with when she 
burning psionics, these rules handle it all in chooses an Arcane Background. A hero 
one simple system. increases her Power Points by taking the 
For ease of use, we call all of these effects Power Points Edge (page 47). 

“powers.” They work the same from game to 
game, but the particular use, modifiers, and 
Trappings give the same core powers endless 
variations. MULTIPLE ARCANE 

BAGKGROUNDS 
Though it should be rare, the Game Master 

LS might allow a character to take multiple 
Start by choosing one of the Arcane Back- Arcane Backgrounds in her setting. 
ground Edges available in your campaign. With her permission, treat each Arcane 
Five different types are presented in this Background as its own set, adding powers, 
book: Gifted, Magic, Miracles, Psionics, and Power Points, and buying appropriate 
Weird Science. skills separately. 
Each type has the following entries: 

= ARCANE SKILL: Each type of power 
has a particular arcane skill listed in its True “four color” super heroes are beyond 
description. Take this skill and buy it just | the scope of these powers. See the Savage 
like any other on the skill list. The attribute Worlds Super Powers Companion for a fast, 
to which the skill is linked is listed in fun, and comprehensive treatment of super 
parentheses beside the skill itself. powers, from street-level crime fighters to 

cosmic champions! 
u STARTING POWERS: The number of powers 
a hero starts with at character creation. 
Additional abilities may be learned with the 

ee. 
New Powers Edge (page 47). The player 

147 



ARGANE BACKGROUND (GIFTED) ARGANE BACKGROUND 
[72] ® ARCANE SKILL: Focus (Spirit) 
a [PSIONIGS) 
| = STARTING POWERS: 1 
[+4 = ARCANE SKILL: Psionics (Smarts) 
(=) = POWER POINTS: 15 ® STARTING POWERS: 2 

S The character has innate abilities that don’t = POWER POINTS: 10 
[#] fit into the usual tropes of magic, miracles, 

& Psionicists tap into their own mental energy 
or psionics. Their powers may be low-level 

to manipulate matter, read minds, and far 

= super powers, divine gifts, or even alien 
more. Some are agents in the employ of a vast 

0 abilities, and are often very unusual or unique 
government agency, while others are often on 

for their setting. 
the run from them! Some may have years of 
training or they might have developed their 

ARGANE BAGKGROUND [MAGIG) incredible powers in isolation. 
= ARCANE SKILL: Spellcasting (Smarts) 
8 STARTING POWERS: 3 ARGANE BAGKGROUND 
= POWER POINTS: 10 (WEIRD SGIENGE) 
Magicians range from powerful wizards to = ARCANE SKILL: Weird Science (Smarts) 
vile cultists. They draw on raw supernatural 

= STARTING POWERS: 2 
energy to fuel their eldritch fires. This energy 
infuses the worlds in which they live, and is ® POWER POINTS: 15 

drawn forth with gestures, words of power, Weird Science is the creation of strange 
or ancient runes. and powerful devices beyond the normal 
Activation: Magic-users must be able to technological level of the setting. It might be 

speak and gesture (they cannot be Bound, possible due to super fuels, alien discoveries, 
page 98) to cast their spells. or rare super-geniuses who constantly push 

the boundaries of science. 

ARGANE BACKGROUND Arcane Devices: Weird scientists auto- 
matically have the Artificer Edge, which 

[MIRAGLES] allows them to create Arcane Devices (see 
= ARCANE SKILL: Faith (Spirit) page 152). Indeed, they must always use 

devices for their powers. 
® STARTING POWERS: 3 

Malfunction: Weird science devices don’t 
= POWER POINTS: 10 

cause Fatigue when they suffer Backlash. 
Those who invoke miracles draw their power They Malfunction instead (see page 153). 
from a divine presence of some sort, including 

Activation: Weird scientists must usually be 
gods, nature, or spirits. Their powers are 

able to reach and manipulate their devices to 
usually invoked with a few words of prayer 

use them (they cannot be Bound, page 98). 
or by performing established rituals. 

The GM may allow exceptions for voice- 
Those who cast miracles are champions activated devices, worn items, and so on. 

of their particular religions. They typically 
have Hindrances that pertain to their service, 
such as Vow or Obligation. They might also 
have Connections to others of their religion «ONE 4 MEEAWATT, REPTTIS 
who can help them out when their divine coLp FusiON—- POWERED, 7 
energies wane. PLASMA Gul) ON THE WAY 
Activation: Blessed champions must be — GABE 

able to speak and gesture (they cannot be 
Bound, page 98) to invoke miracles. 

148 



9 change her “pyrokinesis” to an ice trapping, 
| N for example. 

a | LL 

a ig ited A character can alter the power’s effects 
as she wishes using the Power Modifiers 

Trappings allow the core powers presented 
on page 151. 

in this chapter to have many different 
appearances. They usually have no game SYNERGY 
effect on their own, but are important for 

Sometimes logic dictates that a power’s 
atmosphere and theme. 

Trapping should have some additional effect. 
One character might fire a swarm of bees Zapping someone with a lightning bolt 

to attack her foes, for example, while another while they're standing in water should cause 
shoots red lasers from her eyes. Both are additional damage, for example, or less if 
examples of the bolt power and share the same they're wearing a rubber hazmat suit. 
mechanics, but they look and are described 

When this occurs, the GM can decide there's 
differently. 

synergy that either increases or decreases the 
Trappings do matter when an obstacle effect or damage (GM's call) by +2 or 2. 

or opponent has a particular strength or 
Oppositional forces, such as fire and ice 

weakness. If an ice troll suffers +4 damage 
or light and darkness, don’t have synergy 

from fire-or heat-based attacks, for example 
against one another (though such effects are 

a blast a player describes as a fireball counts 
sometimes accounted for in some creatures’ 

as a fire attack and does +4 damage. 
Special Abilities). If a fire blast hits ice armor 

Once described, a power’s Trappings don’t (protection), for example, there’s no synergy 
change (without the Wizard Edge, page 47). because they cancel each other out equally. 
A psion who hurls bolts of fire can’t suddenly 

b 



mental distraction. A hero can rest while 

AGTIVATION riding ahorse, for example, unless the animal 
is restless, the road is terribly bumpy, traffic 
requires frequent concentration, etc. 

A character activates a power by picking a 
Heroes can also regain Power Points 

target within Range and making an arcane 
while walking if the conditions are generally 

skill roll. A roll less than 4 means the power 
favorable and the pace is leisurely. 

doesn’t activate. The caster spends one 
Power Point regardless of any Edges such DISRUPTION 
as Channeling, unless the ability specifically 

If a character with active powers is Shaken, 
says it reduces the minimum cost to 0. 

Stunned, or Wounded, he must make a 
A roll of 4 or higher means the power Smarts roll. Failure means all his powers 

activates and consumes all the Power Points terminate after the attack that caused the 
allocated to it, even if it misses the target disruption is resolved. 
(such as with bolt), or the defender resists. 

It doesn’t matter who the powers are cast on, 
Success means the hero spends the Power only who cast them. If a mage casts spells on 

Points and resolves the power’s effects. A his allies, the enchantments are only subject to 
raise has additional effects noted in the disruption if the mage is Shaken or Wounded; 
particular power description. not his friends. 
Backlash:A  Critical Failure when activating Arcane Devices are an exception to this rule: 

a power is called Backlash. It causes a level the user must make a Smarts roll to keep his 
of Fatigue and all currently active powers devices functioning. 
instantly terminate (Weird Science has a 
different effect, see Malfunction on page 153). POWERS AS MULTI-AGTIONS 
Group Rolls: The GM can choose to make Each power activated is its own action, and 

Group Rolls (page 89) when large numbers the same or different powers may be cast 
of nonplayer characters are affected by a multiple times as a Multi-Action (see page 
power. 103). A wizard in a fantasy setting might 

open combat by invoking protection and 
GASTING REQUIREMENTS deflection, for example, or a priest might 
A character must be able to see his target and attempt to banish a spirit while invoking smite 
cannot be Bound (see page 98). on his mace. 

MAINTAINING POWERS SHORTING 
It costs 1 Power Point to maintain a power for A character may cast a power with fewer 
its base Duration. If a power’s Duration is five Power Points than it requires (whether she 
rounds, for example, it can be maintained for has them or not) by increasing the difficulty 
another five rounds for 1 Power Point. of her arcane skill roll. 
Maintenance is per target but ignores other For every Power Point a character will short, 

Power Modifiers, so renewing boost Trait on she suffers a —1 penalty to the roll. Casting 
three allies costs 3 Power Points and extends a 3-point healing with 0 Power Points, for 
the effect of each another five rounds. example, inflicts a =3 penalty. 
Unless a power says otherwise, the caster Shorting is risky, however. If a character 

can terminate it as a free action. fails a shorted arcane skill roll, it’s considered 
a Critical Failure (see Activation, above). That 
also means it can’bte rerolled with a Benny! 

A character recovers 5 Power Points per 
hour spent resting, meditating, etc. What 
constitutes “rest” is up to the GM, but 
they do not recharge while powers are 
maintained, or during anything more than 
mild physical exertion, emotional stress, or 

150 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



light in a Small Blast Template centered on 
POWER MODIFIERS the target, and lasts until the power expires. 
Power Modifiers allow characters to It subtracts 2 from her Stealth totals and 
customize their abilities, adding a special negates 1 point of Illumination penalties for 
effect that better reflects her power’s Trapping. those attacking the glowing character. 

Power Modifiers are selected each time a Shroud dims and slightly obscures the 
power is activated and may be freely changed target so that attacks against her suffer a —1 
each time. An icy bolt might cause Armor penalty and she adds +1 to her Stealth rolls. 
Piercing damage in one attack and Lingering 
Damage in the next. HEAVY WEAPON [+2] 

The caster pours his energy into the attack, 
A number of common modifiers are listed 

creating a focused blast. The attack counts as 
below, and some powers have additional 

a Heavy Weapon. 
options as well. The number in parentheses 
is the price in additional Power Points it costs HINDER/HURRY [+1] 
to add the effect. 

The target is slowed in some way, perhaps 
Casters must declare which modifiers due to intense cold, a slippery surface, or 

they're using before rolling their arcane skill. even binding matter or energy. His base Pace 
Unless a modifier says otherwise, is reduced by 2 until the power expires. 

it may be applied to any power, A caster can Hurry the recipient instead. 
but only once per casting. He might get increased energy, sure footing, 
Power Modifiers last for or more powerful muscles. His Pace is 

the Duration of the spell, increased by 2. 
or until the end of the Effects of either modifier aren't cumulative. 
target's next turn in the 
case of Instant powers. 0DAMAGE [+2] 

The target is hit by fire, 
ARMOR PIERCING intense cold, acid, 
(+170 +9)  - gnawing insects, or 
The attack is focused some other Trapping 
to defeat armor or seeks r 4 that continues to cause 
out a foe's exposed areas. Each damage after the initial 
Power Point spent grants the attack. On the victim's 
power AP 2 (see page 65), to next turn, he suffers the 
a maximum of AP 6. power’s base damage minus 

one die type (one additional turn only). 
FATIGUE [+2] If hit with a 2d6 bolt, for example, the 
Powers that drain or tax victim takes 2d4 damage at the start 
an opponent can cause of his next turn. If the base damage is 
Fatigue. This modifier may already a d4 die type, it loses a die instead. 
be attached to any power 
that can cause damage or RANGE (+1/+2) 
is resisted by the target. If Double the power’s listed Range for 1 
she’s affected by the power Power Point, or triple it for +2. This modifier 
in any way, she also suffers may not be used on powers with a Range of 
Fatigue. This cannot cause Touch or the Cone Template. 
Incapacitation, however. 

SELECTIVE [+1] 
GLOW/ SHROUD (+1) With intense focus, the caster can choose 
Glow gives off soft light of not to affect any or all individual 
an appropriate color for targets within a power’s area of effect 
its Trapping (or caster’s (picking all enemies instead of allies 
choice). This creates soft in a blast, for example). 



while a wizard enchants a medallion he calls 
an “amulet of warding.” 

Powers can be focused into devices to Power Points: Once the device is assembled, 
create potions, gizmos, or other creations. it'simbued with however many Power Points 
The advantage is that they can be given to the inventor wants to put into it (and has 
allies. The trade-off is that devices take a available). The points are no longer available 
little preparation to create, and can be lost or to the creator until she transfers them back 
destroyed. into her pool (see Tinkering, next page). 

Devices may be technological in nature, The gizmo can hold as many Power Points 
or they might be sacred, enchanted, or as its inventor has. Gadgets made by a weird 
psychically powered objects, depending on scientist with 20 Power Points, for example, 
the creator’s Arcane Background. (Weird can hold up to 20 Power points. 
scientists must always activate their powers The Power Points stay with the item 
through devices.) until used, and return as described under 
Arcane devices are relatively temporary Recharging, below. 

creations player characters can create from Shorting: Arcane devices cannot be shorted 
their powers. Truly permanent “magic” (see page 150). The user must have enough 
items or devices are setting-specific, don’t use Power Points in the device to activate it. 
Power Points, and are created by the Game 

Multiple Powers: Multiple powers placed 
Master as she sees fit (such as those found in 

into a single item share a common pool of 
the Savage Worlds Fantasy Companion). 

Power Points, and may draw from it as the 
Note: The No Power Points Setting Rule user desires. 

(page 140) isn’t compatible 
Batches: An inventor may create a 

with Arcane Devices. 
number of identical devices at once, 

GREATION such as a box of grenades, rack of ray 
guns, bottle of pills, or bottle of 

Only those heroes with the 
| elixir with multiple doses. 

Artificer Edge can create 
an Arcane Device. The Creation takes an hour per 
“plans” for the device are power as usual but creates 
already known. Maybe multiple identical devices 
the inventor has been imbued with their own 
working on the design individual Power Points. 

for years. Maybe a mentor Consumables: Some items 
handed her a schematic. Or 
maybe she stole a blueprint 
from another “mad” scientist! used once. They cannot be 
At any rate, “creation” refers to recharged or Tinkered with 

the actual assembly of a particular (see below). 

device, not its design. Once a power iy Once the item is out of 
is known it can be placed into any Power Points, consumed, or 
sort of appropriate gizmo. destroyed, its Power Points 

Creating a device takes one hour return to the creator’s pool at the 
per power that can be activated usual rate of recharge. 
through it. The player must write The benefit of making an item 
down what the device is and which consumable is that the caster or 
of her powers it represents. user adds +1 to the appropriate 
Different types of Arcane Back- skill roll when it’s activated. 

grounds interpret their devices as Eating a cake that makes one 
befits their theme. The protection grow, for example (the growth/ 
power used by a weird scientist shrink power), adds +1 to the 
might be an electromagnetic vest, arcane skill total. 

152 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



REGHARGING 
An inventor regains Power Points normally (5 DEVICE EXAMPLES hg 
per hour spent resting). She may assign them Dr. Destruction makes an invisibility belt 
to any of the current devices she has at hand and gives it to one of his minions. 
(GM's call), keep them in her pool to assign He has 30 Power Points and puts 10 of 
later (via Tinkering, see below), or use them them into the belt, reducing his remaining 
to create new devices. pool to 20. 

Narratively, recharging may represent the When the minion wants to turn invisible, 
device being plugged into an outlet, replacing Dr. Destruction makes the Weird Science 
some kind of fuel or battery, recharging roll (even if he’s not actually present). If 
magical or sacred energy, or even fritzing out the roll is a Critical Failure, it fails to start 
for a while until it just starts working again. and loses d4 Power Points. 

Example: Gabe’s lightning gun and electrostatic ~ Dr. Destruction also gives the minion the 
coat are drained after a particularly vicious fight. bolt power in the form of a ray gun. When 
Gabe regains 5 Power Points an hour later, and the minion wants to use it, he rolls Shooting 
decides to put3 into the gun and 2 into the coat. (not Dr. Destruction). If the minion rolls 

a Critical Failure while firing the ray gun, 
the attack fails and it loses d4 Power Points. 

A creator can reassign Power Points between > ron, SE SSG 
her devices and her own pool (other than 
consumables) by Tinkering. This takes one MALFUNGTIONS 
minute per Power Point reassigned, and If a character rolls a Critical Failure when 
she must have the items at hand. Inventors using a device, neither he nor the caster suffer 
should lend out their devices very carefully! the usual Fatigue from Backlash (page 150). 
Example: Gabe has 4 Power Points in his Instead, the device Malfunctions: 
lightning gun (the bolt power). His electrostatic = MALFUNCTION: All of the device's active 
coat (the protection power) is drained so he powers terminate instantly and it loses a d4 
decides to reroute 2 Power Points from the gun of its remaining Power Points. 
to the coat. It takes him two minutes to do so. 

Dynamic Backlash: If this Setting Rule is in 
play, the gizmo Malfunctions and causes a roll 
on the Dynamic Backlash Table (page 138). 

The skill used to activate the gadget depends 
on the form it takes. Guns use Shooting, VARIABLE POWERS 
grenades use Athletics (throwing), and so Some powers allow choices as they're 
on. If there is no other obvious skill, use the 

activated, such as whether to boost or lower 
inventor’s arcane skill. The inventor makes a Trait and which one, whether to create 
the roll in this case (and can use her Bennies 

illumination or darkness with light/obscure, 
or other applicable Edges to influence it). or hiding or finding magic with detect/ 
Success and failure work as usu—atlhe conceal arcana. 

device loses 1 Power Point if its activation If the creator makes only one of those 
roll is failed. A Critical Failure indicates a options available when she creates her 
Malfunction, however (see below). 

device, it costs 1 less Power Point than usual 
Power Modifiers: The user may spend as to activate (minimum of 1). 

many of the device’s Power Points as desired A belt of boost Trait, for example, costs 2 
to enable any applicable Power Modifiers. Power Points to activate. A belt of Strength 

(boost Trait that can only affect Strength), costs 
only 1 Power Point. 

LIGHTNING GUN!” 
_LABE 



Powers expire at the end of the character's 
turn X rounds later, where X is the Duration 
listed. Count the round the power activated. 
If a psychic activates boost Trait (Duration 5) 

Listed below are a number of powers on the second round of combat, for example, 
available in most Savage Settings. Each power it remains in place until the end of her turn on 
has the following statistics: the sixth round. 
Rank: The Rank a character must be to Powers may be maintained for their base 

learn the power. Duration for 1 Power Point per individual. 
Power Points: The cost to activate the Unless it says otherwise, the caster can ter- 

power in Power Points. minate a power she’s activated as a free action. 
Range: The maximum distance between She must terminate the entire power — she 

the caster and the power’s effect. Range is can’t leave it on for some and off for others. 
often expressed as Smarts or some multiple Trappings: These are descriptive ideas and 
thereof. If so, read Smarts as inches on the suggestions for how the power might look or 
tabletop (twice thaitn yards).A Smarts of d10, manifest in different types of settings. 
for example, means the power can be cast up 
to 10” (20 yards) away. LIST OF POWERS 
Unless the power says otherwise, Range 

has no effect after the power is activated. An ARGANE PROTEGTION 
ally who has been granted invisibility, for 

Rank: Novice 
example, may then move beyond the caster’s 

Power Points: 1 
Smarts with no ill effect. 

Range: Smarts 
Duration: How long the power lasts in Duration: 5 

rounds (unless otherwise noted). Trappings: Concentration, a dull glow 
around the protected character, a fetish. 

Success with arcane protection means hostile 
NAMING POWERS . powers suffer a—2 penalty (-4 with a raise) to 

affect this character. If the power causes harm, 
Players are encouraged to note their 

damage is also reduced a like amount. 
powers’ Trappings and what the character 
might call them. A druid in a typical Arcane protection stacks with Arcane 
fantasy setting might write down his spells Resistance should the recipient have both! 
like this, for example: MODIFIERS 
* Bolt (Splinters — shards of wood) = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 
* Boost/Lower Trait (Blessing/Curse of Gaia may affect more than one target for 1 
—slight healthy or sickly green glow) additional Power Point each. 

* Entangle (Entangle — grasping vines rise 
from the earth) ARMOR 

e Protection (Bark skin—skin turns See Protection, page 165 
vaguely bark-like) 
A mad scientist in the world of Deadlands: 

The Weird West might record the exact same Rank: Veteran 

powers like this: Power Points: 3 
Range: Smarts 

* Bolt (Acid gun) 
Duration: Instant 

®'Boost/Lower Trait (Dr. Worthington’s 
Trappings: Holy items, arcane symbols, 

Patented Pep Pills) 
handful of salt. 

® Entangle (Dr. Worthington’s Fast-Drying 
Resin) Banish sends entities from immaterial planes 

* Protection (Electrostatic clothing) back to their native dimensions. This includes 
ghosts, demons, elementals, and similar 
beings (at the GM's discretion). 

154 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



Banishing a being is an opposed roll of the wolves (Size 1) costs 5 points (remember the 
caster’s arcane skill versus the target's Spirit. minimum cost of 1), for example. Controlling 
Success means the target is Shaken, and each a rhino (Size 5) costs 5 points. 
raise causes a Wound. Success means the creatures obey simple 

If this Incapacitates the target it returns to commands, like a well-trained dog. They 
its native plane of existence. Banished entities attack foes and endanger their lives for their 
may return when the Game Master feels it's master. A raise on the arcane skill roll means 
appropriate, such as the next full moon, when the beasts are more obedient. They won't kill 
summoned again, or even a few rounds later themselves but overcome their natural fears 
if it's a particularly powerful creature under to follow their orders. 
the right conditions or in a location of power. Swarms can also be controlled. Small 

Swarms cost 1 point, Medium Swarms cost 2, 
BARRIER and Large Swarms cost 3. 
Rank: Seasoned 

Beast friend works only onnatural creatures 
Power Points: 2 

with animal intelligence, not humanoids, 
Range: Smarts 

and has no effect on conjured, magical, or 
Duration: 5 

otherwise “unnatural” animals. 
Trappings: Fire, ice, thorns, force, bones, 

energy. MODIFIERS 

Barrier creates a straight wall 5” (10 yards) ® MIND RIDER (+1): The caster can commun- 

long and 1" (two yards) tall, of immobile icate and sense through any of the beasts 
material that conforms to the surface it’s cast he’s befriended. 
upon. Thickness varies depending on what 
the wall is made of, butis usually a few inches. 
The wall has a Hardness of 10, and may be 

destroyed as any other object (see Breaking 
Things on page 98). 
When the spell expires or the wall is broken 

it crumbles to dust or dissipates. Trappings 
are never left behind. 

MODIFIERS 
8 DAMAGE (+1): The barrier causes 2d4 
damage to anyone who contacts it. 

= HARDENED (+1): The wall is Hardness 12. 

u SHAPED (+2): The barrier forms a circle, 
square or other basic shape. 

® SIZE (+1): The length and height of the 
barrier doubles. 

Rank: Novice 
Power Points: Special 
Range: Smarts 
Duration: 10 minutes 
Trappings: The caster concentrates and 

gestures with his hands. 

This spell allows an individual to speak with 
and guide the actions of nature's beasts. The 

lL cost to cast is equal to the sum of their Size 
(minimum 1 per creature; see the creatures 
in Chapter Six for examples). Controlling five 



BLAST soir 
Rank: Seasoned Rank: Novice 

(2) Power Points: 3 Power Points: 1 
[=] 
= Range: Smarts x2 Range: Smarts x2 
© Duration: Instant Duration: Instant 
Oo 

Trappings: Balls of fire, ice, light, darkness, Trappings: Fire, ice, light, darkness, colored 
S colored bolts, swarm of insects. bolts, a stream of insects. 
Lu 

= Blast launches a ball of explosive energy or Bolt sends damaging bursts of energy, streaks 

> matter. The area of effect is a Medium Blast of holy light, or shards of matter toward 
[oe Template. Every target within suffers 2d6 one’s foes. 
wn damage, or 3d6 with a raise (see Area Effect There are no Range penalties, but the arcane 

Attacks, page 97). skill roll is affected by Cover, Illumination, 

MODIFIERS and all other usual penalties. 
= AREA EFFECT (+0/+1): The caster can focus The damage of the bolt is 2d6, or 3d6 with 
the blast to a Small Blast Template for no a raise. 
extra cost, or a Large Blast Template for +1. 

MODIFIERS 
® DAMAGE (+2): The blast causes 3d6 damage = DAMAGE (+2): The bolt causes 3d6 damage 
(4d6 with a raise). (4d6 with a raise). 

BLIND BOOST/LOWER TRAIT 
Rank: Novice Rank: Novice 
Power Points: 2 Power Points: 2 
Range: Smarts Range: Smarts 
Duration: Instant Duration: 5 (boost); Instant (lower) 
Trappings: Bright flash of light, sand in eyes, Trappings: Physical change, glowing aura, 

confusion. potions. 
Those affected by this malicious power suffer This power allows a character to increase or 
blurred vision or near-complete blindness decrease a target's Trait (attribute or skill). 
with a raise. 

Boosting an ally’s Trait increases the selected 
Success means the victim suffers a -2 Trait one die type, or two with a raise. 

penalty to all actions requiring sight, or —4 
Lowering an enemy’s Trait has a Duration 

with a raise. 
of Instant and lowers the selected attribute 

The victim automatically tries to shake off or skill a die type with success, or two 
the effect with a Vigor roll as a free action with a raise (to a minimum of d4). A victim 
at the end of his following turns. Success automatically tries to shake off the effect 
removes 2 points of penalties, and a raise with a Spirit roll as a free action at the end 
removes the effect entirely. of his following turns. Success improves the 
MODIFIERS effect one die type, and a raise removes the 
= AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): For +2 points the effect entirely. 
power affects everyone in a Medium Blast Additional castings don’t stack on a single 
Template. For +3 points the area of effect is Trait (take the highest), but may affect 
increased to a Large Blast Template. different Traits. 

® STRONG (+1): The Vigor roll to shake off the MODIFIERS 
effect is made at 2. = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 

may affect more than one target for 1 
additional Power Point each. 

® STRONG (+1): Lower Trait only. The Spirit 
roll to shake off the effect is made at -2. 



BURROW 
Rank: Novice Rank: Novice 
Power Points: 2 Power Points: 1 
Range: Smarts Range: Smarts 
Duration: 5 Duration: Until the end of the victim's next 
Trappings: Dissolving into the earth and turn 
appearing elsewhere. Trappings: Hypnotic lights, brief illusions, 

Burrow allows the recipient to meld into raw loud noises. 

earth. He can remain underground if he Confusion confounds a target, making him 
wants in a sort of “limbo” or burrow through both Distracted and Vulnerable if he fails a 
the ground at half his normal Pace (or full Smarts roll (at —2 with a raise on the arcane 
Pace with a raise). He may not run. skill roll). Both states are removed at the end 

A burrowing character may attempt to of the victim's next turn. 
surprise a foe by making an opposed Stealth MODIFIERS 
versus Notice roll. If the burrower wins, the = AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): For +2 points the 
target is Vulnerable to him only. With a raise, power affects everyone in a Medium Blast 
the burrower gets the Drop. Targets on Hold Template. For +3 points the area of effect is 
may attempt to interrupt the attack before increased to a Large Blast Template. 
it occurs. 

Burrowers can’t usually surprise a foe once DAMAGE FIELD 
their presence is known, but can still burrow Rank: Seasoned 
for protection and mobility. Power Points: 4 

Range: Smarts 
MODIFIERS 

Duration: 5 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 

Trappings: Fiery aura, spikes, electrical field. 
may affect more than one target for 1 
additional Power Point each. Damage field creates a dangerous aura around 

the recipient that harms foes foolish enough 
= POWER (+1): The caster can burrow through 

to get too close. 
stone, concrete, or similar substances. 
(Some substances, like plastic, glass, solid At the end of the affected character's 
lead, etc., might be resistant at the GM's turn, all adjacent beings (including allies!) 
discretion.) automatically take 2d4 damage. 

MODIFIERS 
® DAMAGE (+2): The damage field causes 2d6 

Rank: Novice damage. 
Power Points: 2 
Range: Cone Template DARKSIGHT 
Duration: Instant Rank: Novice 
Trappings: A shower of flames, light, or Power Points: 1 

other matter or energy. Range: Smarts 
Burst produces a large fan of energy that Duration: One hour 
bathes its targets in red-hot fire, a cone of cold, Trappings: Glowing eyes, dilated pupils, 
or other damaging matter or energy. sonic sight. 
Success creates a Cone Template starting at Darksight allows a hero to see in the dark. 

the caster and extending outward (see Area With success, he ignores up to 4 points of 
Effect Attacks, page 97). Everything within illumination penalties. With a raise, he ignores 
suffers 2d6 damage (or 3d6 with a raise). up to six points and can see in pitch darkness. 

MODIFIERS MODIFIERS 
® DAMAGE (+2): The burst causes 3d6 damage, = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 
or 4d6 with a raise. may affect more than one target for 1 

additional Power Point each. 



DEFLEGTION MODIFIERS 

Rank: Novice = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 

Power Points: 3 may affect more than one viewer for detect, 
Range: Smarts or item for conceal, for 1 additional Power 

Duration: 5 Point each. 

Trappings: Mystical shield, gust of wind, = AREA OF EFFECT (+1/+2): Conceal only. 
phantom servant that intercepts missiles. The power affects everything in a sphere 

Deflection powers work in a variety of ways. the size of a Medium Blast Template for +1 
Some manifestations actually deflect incoming points, or a Large Blast Template for +2. 
attacks, others blur the target's form or ® STRONG (+1): Conceal only. Detection rolls to 
produce illusionary effects. The end result see through the concealment are made at —2. 

¥ is always the same, howeve— tro misdirect 
incoming melee and missile attacks from the DISGUISE 
recipient of the power. Rank: Seasoned 
Once cast, foes must subtract 2 from attack Power Points: 2 

rolls directed at the user (or 4 with a raise). Range: Smarts 
Duration: 10 minutes 

MODIFIERS Trappings: Malleable features, illusionary 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power appearance, hair of new form. 
may affect more than one target for 1 

Disguise allows the target to assume the 
additional Power Point each. 

appearance of another person of the same 

DETEGT/GONGEAL ARGANA Size and shape, including clothing. It does 
not confer any abilities, however. 

Rank: Novice 
Power Points: 2 Those who have reason to question the 
Range: Smarts imposters identity make a Notice roll at —2 
Duration: 5 (detect); one hour (conceal) to see through the disguise (-4 with a raise on 
Trappings: Waving hands, whispered the casting roll). This is a free action. 
words. MODIFIERS 

Detect arcana allows the recipient of the power = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 
to see and detect all supernatural persons, may affect more than one target for 1 
objects, or effects in sight. This includes additional Power Point each. 
invisible foes, enchantments on people or u SIZE (+1): The recipient may assume the 
items, weird science devices, and so on. With shape of someone up to two Sizes larger or 
a raise, the caster knows the general type of smaller than themselves. 
enchantment as well — harmful, obscurement, 
magic, miracles, etc. DISPEL 

Detect arcana also allows a character to ignore Rank: Seasoned 
up to 4 points of penalties when attacking foes Power Points: 1 
hidden by magical darkness, invisibility, or Range: Smarts 
similar abilities (or all penalties with a raise). Duration: Instant 

Conceal arcana prevents detection of arcane Trappings: Waving hands, whispered 
energies on one being or item of Normal Scale words. 

(see the Size Table page 179). Dispel allows a hero to negate enemy 
Detect vs. Conceal: Detecting arcana against powers. It has no effect on permanent 

someone or something that’s been concealed is enchantments or innate abilities such as a 

an opposed roll of arcane skills (roll each time dragon's breath or a banshee’s scream. Dispel 
it’s attempted, but no more than once per affects arcane devices normally (see Arcane 
turn). If the concealment wins, the character Devices, page 152). 
cannot see through the ruse with this casting, Dispel can be used on a power already in 
but may terminate this instance and try again. effector to counter anenemy powerasit’s being 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



used. The latter requires the countering mage ghost, for example, the conversation should 
to be on Hold and interrupt his foe's action. occur at its grave, where it was killed, or with 

In either case, dispelling an opponent's a personal object in hand. Oracles may only 
power is an opposed roll of arcane skills (with be engaged at temples, fire spirits near open 
a —2 modifier if the rival's power is of another flames, and so on. 

type such as magic vs. miracles, psionics vs. After the preparation time is complete, the 
weird science, etc.). caster makes her arcane skill roll. Success 

If the dispelling character wins, the targeted allows her to engage with the spirit and ask 
power ends immediately (or fails if it was it any questions she might have. The entity 
countered with the usual results of failure). must answer to the best of its ability, as 

With a raise, the recipient of the dispelled directly or ambiguously as the Game Master 
power is also Distracted. feels fits the spirit’s personality and the feel 

of her campaign. A raise means the spirit is 
MODIFIERS more helpful, knowledgeable, or direct than 
u POWER (+1): For +1 Power Points, dispel can usual (whether it wants to be or not). 
disruptenchanted devices for one round, or 

The type of entity contacted determines how 
two with a raise. The difficulty to do so is 

it communicates. Spirits in the netherworld 
-2 for permanently enchanted items such as 

tend to know only those things pertinent to 
found in most swords & sorcery campaigns, 

their life and death — and they may not even 
or —4 for divine or legendary relics. 

know the identity of their killer if the person 

DIVINATION was masked or unseen. 

Rank: Heroic Likewise, nature spirits know only about 
Power Points: 5 their local environs, demons know only about 
Range: Self the affairs theyre directly involved in, and so 
Duration: A brief conversation of about five on. The Game Master must decide what the 
minutes. entity knows based on its background, origin, 

Trappings: Seances, prayers, demonic and personality. 
interrogation. Once a spirit has been conversed with 

Divination allows the caster to contact other- it may not be contacted again for 24 hours. 
worldly beings or forces to gain information. The Game Master may extend this to a 

community of spirits in a single place, such as 
Preparing the spell takes one uninterrupted 

water spirits in a babbling brook or nameless 
minute, and must be done at a site relevant to 

spirits in a mass grave. 
the spirit being contacted. If speaking with a 



DRAIN POWER POINTS This power grants basic control over the 
Rank: Veteran four traditional elements: air, earth, fire, and 

Power Points: 2 water (the elements may vary depending on 
Range: Smarts the setting). The power acts as if it has a dé 
Duration: Instant Strength, or d8 with a raise. 
Trappings: Prayer, whispered words, gestures. Here are some ideas for what each element 

Powerful mages, priests, psykers, and the can do. Each is an action. 

like can use this ability to drain arcane energy u AIR: Push someone, blow out a torch, fan 
from their foes. They can sometimes even a flame, cool someone down (+2 to Fatigue 
leech the stolen energy for themselves. rolls in oppressive heat). 
The power is opposed by the target's Spirit, = EARTH: Move a square foot of earth (half 

and the caster suffers a -2 penalty to her roll if that in stone) each round, cover tracks. 
the target has a different Arcane Background ® FIRE: Conjure flame about the size of a 
than her own. torch, hurl a small blast of fire at someone 
Success drains 1d6 of the rival's Power (Str damage), spread existing flame (see 

Points (if any, and the die doesn’t Ace). With Fire on page 127). 
a raise, the caster adds the points to her own. ® WATER: Conjure a quart of water (not 
This may take her above her usual maximum! “inside” objects or people), purify a gallon 
They last until used, and must be the first of water per casting. 
spent when casting. 
Drain Power Points can also be used on an EMPATHY 

arcane device (the creator still resists with her Rank: Novice 
arcane skill whether she wields it ornot). The Power Points: 1 
device can’t lose more Power Points than ithas. Range: Smarts 

Duration: 5 
ELEMENTAL MANIPULATION Trappings: Concentration, a warm or 
Rank: Novice sympathetic smile, exchanging a pleasantry. 
Power Points: 1 The caster forms an emotional bond between 
Range: Smarts himself and the target with a successful arcane 
Duration: 5 skill vs Spirit roll. He knows the target's 
Trappings:A  few simple gestures. emotional state and most basic surface 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



thoughts, and gains +1 (+2 with a raise) to super-intense conditions such as actual lava 
Intimidation, Persuasion, Performance, or or the massive radiation of a melting nuclear 
Taunt rolls against him. core, for example. 

Empathy also works on animals, adding +2 Environmental protection reduces damage 
to Riding or other rolls used to interact with from like sources by 4 (6 with a raise). If 
the creature. protecting against intense heat, for example 

it protects against a flamethrower or bolt with 
ENTANGLE a fire Trapping. 
Rank: Novice 

MODIFIERS 
Power Points: 2 

= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 
Range: Smarts 

may affect more than one target for 1 
Duration: Instant 

additional Power Point each. 
Trappings: Glue bomb, vines, handcuffs, 
webs. FARSIGHT 

Entangle allows the caster to restrain a target Rank: Seasoned 
with ice, bands of energy, or other vine-like Power Points: 2 
Trappings (Hardness 5). If successful, the Range: Smarts 
target is Entangled. With a raise, he’s Bound. Duration: 5 
Victims may break free on their turn as Trappings: Invisibly marked targets, 

detailed under Bound & Entangled on guiding winds, eagle eyes. 
page 98. Farsight allows the recipient to see in detail 
MODIFIERS over great distances. She can read lips or read 
= AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): For +2 points the fine print up to a mile distant. 
power affects everyone in a Medium Blast With a raise, she also halves Range penalties 
Template. For +3 points the area of effect is for Shooting, Athletics (throwing), or other 
increased to a Large Blast Template. abilities affected by Range. 

® STRONG (+2): The entangling material is MODIFIERS 
particularly resilient. Rolls to break free are = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 
made at -2 and its Toughness increases to 7. may affect more than one target for 1 

additional Power Point each. 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
Rank: Novice 
Power Points: 2 Rank: Novice 
Range: Smarts Power Points: 2 
Duration: One hour Range: Smarts 
Trappings: A mark on the forehead, potions, Duration: Instant 

gills. Trappings: Gestures, eldritch energy, cold 
Adventurers sometimes travel beneath chills. 
the waves, in space, or other hazardous This power causes overwhelming dread and 
environments. This power protects them horror. The affected make a Fear roll. Extras 
from crushing depths, scathing heat, intense who fail are Panicked and Wild Cards roll on 
cold, and even radiation. the Fear Table. If the power is cast with a raise, 
Environmental protection allows the target the Fear roll is at -2 and Wild Cards add +2 to 

to breathe, speak, and move at his normal Fear Table results. 
Pace in an otherwise fatal environment. 

MODIFIERS 
It protects him against intense heat, cold, 

= AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): For +2 points the 
radiation, atmospheric or fluid pressure, and 

power affects everyone in a Medium Blast 
lack of oxygen. Generally, the adventurer 

Template. For +3 points the area of effect is 
can function normally underwater, in space, 

increased to a Large Blast Template. 
within the cone of a volcano, etc. It fails 
quickly (1d4 rounds) in the presence of 

~ 



iy roll (at -2 if the caster got a raise). Those who 

Rank: Veteran fail are hurled 2d6" — directly away from the 
Power Points: 3 caster if using the Cone Template or directly 
Range: Smarts away from the center if using a Blast Template 
Duration: 5 (the caster chooses for those in the dead center). 
Trappings: Gusty winds, wings, broomsticks. Victims who strike a hard object (such as a 
Fly allows a character to soar at Pace 12", or wall) take 2d4 damage (nonlethal unlessit’s a 

twice that with a raise (he may not Run). spiked wall or other more dangerous hazard). 
Airborne Targets: Flying or airborne targets 

MODIFIERS 
suffer an additional -2 to their Strength rolls 

= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+2): The power 
as they have no ground to brace themselves on. 

may affect more than one target for 2 
additional Power Points each. MODIFIERS 

= AREA EFFECT (+1): Havoc affects a Large 
GROWTH/ SHRINK Blast Template. 
Rank: Seasoned u STRONG (+1): Strength rolls are made at -2. 
Power Points: 2 per point of Size change 
Range: Smarts HEALING 
Duration: 5 Rank: Novice 
Trappings: Gestures, words of power, Power Points: 3 

potions. Range: Touch 
Growth increases the recipient's Size by 1 for Duration: Instant 
every 2 Power Points spent. Each increase in Trappings: Laying on hands, touching the 
Size grants the target a one-step increase to victim with a holy symbol, prayer. 
Strength and 1 point of Toughness (see page Healing removes Wounds less than an hour 
178 for more on Size.) This does not increase old. The penalty to the caster’s arcane skill roll 
Wounds regardless of change to Scale. is the victim's Wounds, if any (to a maximum 
Shrink reduces the Size of the subject one of 3 for those who can take more than 

step for every 2 Power Points spent to a three). A success removes one Wound, and 
maximum of Size -2 (approximately the a raise removes two. The power may be cast 
size of a cat). Each step reduced decreases additional times toremove additional Wounds. 
Strength one die type (minimum of d4) and For Extras, the GM must first determine 
Toughness by 1 (minimum of 2). if the ally is still alive (see Aftermath, page 

For unwilling targets, the caster’s arcane 96). If so, a successful arcane skill roll 
skill roll is opposed by Spirit. returns the ally to action (Shaken if it matters.) 

MODIFIERS 
= GREATER HEALING (+10): Greater healing 

Rank: Novice 
can restore any Wound, including those 

Power Points: 2 
more than an hour old. 

Range: Smarts 
Duration: Instant = CRIPPLING INJURIES (+20): The power 

Trappings: Whirlwind, chaotic poltergeists, can heal a permanent Crippling Injury (see 
repulsion field. Incapacitation, page 95). This requires an 

hour of preparation and only one casting is 
This ability creates chaos and mischief for all 

permitted per injury. If it fails, this caster 
those within its area of effect, hurling debris 

cannot heal that particular injury (but 
and rivals in all directions. 

someone else may try). If successful, the 
With success, the caster places a Medium subject is Exhausted for 24 hours. 

Blast Template anywhere within Range, or 
® NEUTRALIZE POISON OR DISEASE (+1): A 

a Cone Template emanating from the caster 
successful healing roll negates any poison or 

(see Area Effect Attacks, page 97). 
disease. If the poison or disease has a bonus 

Anyone touched by the template is or penalty associated with it, the modifier 
Distracted and must then make a Strength applies to the arcane skill roll as well. 

162 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



may talk, illusionary crows caw, and so on. 
Rank: Novice It may not mask or mute existing sound, 
Power Points: 3 however. 
Range: Smarts ® STRONG (+2): Smarts rolls to disbelieve the 
Duration: 5 illusion are made at —2. 
Trappings: Magical spells, holograms, 
“ethereal materializers.” INTANGIBILITY 

Oneofthe greatest powers isthe ability to create Rank: Heroic 

something from nothing — even if it's not real! Power Points: 5 
Range: Smarts 

Illusion can be used to create a visual 
Duration: 5 

scene or replica of most anything the caster 
Trappings: Ghost form, body of shadow, 

can imagine, but it is silent, intangible, and 
gaseous transformation. 

incapable of affecting the real world. For 
example, illusionary weapons pass through With a successful arcane skill roll, whoever 

foes, one cannot sit in an illusionary chair receives this power becomes incorporeal. He 
and an illusionary dog has no audible bark. is unable to affect the physical world, and 

it cannot affect him. He can travel through 
Those who contact an illusion or doubt 

walls, and non-magical weapons pass straight 
it's real make a Smarts roll as a free action 

through him. Any items carried at the time of 
(at -2 if the power was activated with a raise). 

casting are also incorporeal. 
If successful, that individual is no longer 
subject to this casting. While incorporeal, the character may 

affect other incorporeal beings (including 
The GM should make group rolls for Extras 

himself), and he is still susceptible to 
as they point out the illusion’s inconsistencies 

supernatural attacks, including powers and 
to each other. 

enchanted items. 
The volume of the illusion must fit within a 

The being becomes corporeal when the 
sphere the size of a Medium Blast Template 

power ends, but if within someone or 
(4" or eight yards in diameter). 

something he’s shunted to the nearest open 
MODIFIERS space and Stunned. 
® SOUND (+1): The power generates sound If cast on an unwilling target, the victim 
appropriate to the illusion. lllusionary allies resists with Spirit. 



INVISIBILITY MIND LINK 
Rank: Seasoned Rank: Novice 
Power Points: 5 Power Points: 1 
Range: Smarts Range: Smarts 
Duration: 5 Duration: 30 minutes 
Trappings: Powder, potion, iridescent lights. Trappings: Headpieces, talismans of Tao or 
With a success, the character and his personal other gods, crystals. 
items are transparent except for a vague blur Mind link creates a telepathic connection 
or outline. Any action taken against him that between two individuals (which does not 
requires sight is made at —4, or —6 with a raise. necessarily have to include the caster). The 
The same penalty applies to Notice rolls to link accommodates only willing subjects 
detect the unseen presence. and communication— thoughts that aren't 

consciously transmitted aren't relayed. 
MODIFIERS 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+3): The power Once activated, the Range between all 

may affect more than one target for 3 linked minds is one mile, or five with a raise. 

additional Power Points each. If any of the linked characters suffers a 
Wound, all others must make a Smarts roll or 

LIGHT /DARKNESS be Shaken (this cannot cause a Wound). 
Rank: Novice The speed of communication is that 
Power Points: 2 of normal speech, but with a raise 
Range: Smarts members may communicate 
Duration: 10 minutes up to 30 seconds 
Trappings: Illusionary » or so of speech on 

torch, sunlight, a single combat 
darkness, thick turn. 
fogs. 

MODIFIERS 
Light creates 

= ADDITIONAL 
bright illumin- © RECIPIENTS (+1): 
ation in a Large NY The power may affect 
Blast Template. 

additional individuals for 1 
With a raise, the 

additional Power Point each. 
light can be focused 
into a 5” (10 yard) 
beam as well. Rank: Novice 
Darkness blocks illumination Power Points: 2 

in an area the size of a Large Range: Smarts 
Blast Template, making the Duration: Instant 
area Dark, or Pitch Darkness Trappings: Psionic invasion, 
with a raise (see Illumination soulsight. 
on page 102). Mind reading is an opposed 

If light and darkness overlap, roll versus the target's 
they create a patch of Dim Smarts. Success allows 
light (=2). the character to gain one 

MODIFIERS truthful answer from the 

® MOBILE (+1): The caster subject. The target is aware of 

can move the area of the mental intrusion unless the 

effect up to his arcane mind reader gets a raise. The GM 

skill die type each round may apply modifiers based on the 

after casting, or attach it to an subject's mental Hindrances or current 

inanimate object when first cast. state of mind. 

164 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



watching an actual event, it occurs in real 

Rank: Veteran time, just as if watching a digital tape. 

Power Points: 3 MODIFIERS 
Range: Smarts = AUDIBLE HISTORY (+2): The caster can now 
Duration: Instant hear sounds and conversations as well. 
Trappings: A noxious drink, parasites, 

touching the target's temples. 
Mind wipe removes a target's memories, a Rank: Novice 
terrible violation in most civilized societies. Power Points: 1 
The power is opposed by a victim's Smarts Range: Smarts 
and requires a full minute of mental struggle. Duration: 5 
The victim must be conscious during this Trappings: A mystical glow, hardened skin, 
time, so if not restrained he can simply move ethereal armor, a mass of nanites. 
out of Range. Protection creates a field of energy or armor 

If successful, the victim forgets a single around a character, giving him 2 points of 
event (up to about 30 minutes of time). A raise Armor, or +4 with a raise. 
removes a complex memory of several hours. Whether the protection is visible or not 

If the defender wins, the caster cannot affect depends on the Trapping — this is entirely 
him with mind wipe for 24 hours. (Others may up to the caster. 
reattempt the power, however.) Protection doesn’t normally stack with other 
The memory remains missing but strong armor, but see the Toughness modifier. 

evidence that challenges its “logic” allows 
MODIFIERS 

a Smarts roll at 2 to remember fragments 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 

determined by the GM. 
may affect additional targets at a cost of 1 

MODIFIERS Power Point each. 
m EDIT (+1): Instead of wiping the memory, = MORE ARMOR (+1): Success grants 4 points 
the caster edits it as she sees fit instead. of Armor (+6 with a raise). 

® FAST CAST (+2): The caster can wipe a ® TOUGHNESS (+2): Protection provides 
memory as an action. Toughness instead of Armor and is not 

affected by AP (magical or otherwise). This 
means it stacks with natural or worn armor. 

Rank: Seasoned 
Power Points: 2 PUMMEL 
Range: Touch See Havoc, page 162. 
Duration: Special 
Trappings: Touching the object, glowing PUPPET 
hands Rank: Veteran 

Object reading is the ability to see the past of Power Points: 3 
an inanimate object, discovering who held Range: Smarts 
it, where it’s been, and what it might have Duration: 5 
been used for. The object has no sentience Trappings: Glowing eyes, trance-like state, a 
of its own — the caster simply sees and swinging pocket watch, voodoo dolls. 
hears visions of the past that took place in Puppet is an opposed roll of the character's 
its presence. arcane skill versus the target's Spirit. With 
Success allows the character to see events success, the victim automatically obeys 

that occurred within 10 yards up to about five commands that don’t directly harm himself 
years past. A raise increases this to 100 years or those he cares about. 
and 20 yards. The caster can “fast forward” With a raise, the target is completely 
and “rewind” as desired, skimming about 10 controlled, but gets an automatic Spirit roll 
years of history per minute of real time. When as a free action to avoid directly harming 

himself or those he cares about. If the puppet’s 



resistance succeeds, he doesn’t carry out that RESURRECTION 
particular command but doesn’t otherwise Rank: Heroic 
resist his master. With a raise, he breaks the Power Points: 30 
controller's hold and the power ends. Range: Touch 
Commands are general, such as “attack that Duration: Instant 

person” or “open that door.” The controller Trappings: Elaborate ceremonies, rare 
doesn’t get to dictate how many actions the plants, magical amulets, divine 
victim uses in a turn, whether or not he uses intervention 
his Sweep Edge, etc. Perhaps the greatest power of all is the ability 
MODIFIERS to bring someone back from the dead. It can 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+2): The caster restore lost loves, bring solace to the grieving, 
may affect others at the cost of 2 Power and topple kingdoms. 
Points each. Returning the dead to life requires a reason- 

ably complete corpsneo more than a year old. 
QUICKNESS The caster then prays, meditates, chants, or 
See Sloth/Speed, page 167. otherwise concentrates on mending the body 

and pulling the spirit back to it for four hours. 
Once done, the healer makes a casting roll 

Rank: Novice at —8. If successful, the victim returns to life 
Power Points: 1 with three Wounds and is Exhausted. With a 
Range: Smarts raise, she returns merely Exhausted. 
Duration: Instant 
Trappings: Prayer, tonics. MODIFIERS 

® POWER (+5): The hero can raise a spirit 
Relief removes one Fatigue level, or two 

dead up to a decade for +5 Power Points. 
with a raise. It can also remove a character's 
Shaken status, and removes Stunned status 
with a raise. 

Rank: Novice 
MODIFIERS Power Points: Special 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power Range: Self 
may affect more than one target for 1 Duration: 5 
additional Power Point each. Trappings: “Morphing,” talismans, tattoos. 

Many cultures have legends of shamans or 
wizards who take on the shape of animals. 



This power does just that, allowing the caster SLOTH/SPEED 
to take the form of any animal (including Rank: Seasoned 
fantastic creatures such as dragons and Power Points: 2 
hippogriffs if they exist in that setting, but Range: Smarts 
not humanoids, undead, etc). Duration: Instant (sloth); 5 (speed) 
What a character can change into depends Trappings: Slowing time, blurred motion, a 

on his Rank: slippery patch of oil orice. 
Sloth lessens celerity and coordination while 

SHAPE CHANGE speed increases it. It halves the target's total 
COST RANK SIZE movement each round (round up). With a 
3 Novice Size -2 to Size -1 raise, movement is also an action. The target 

automatically attempts to shake off the effects 
5 Seasoned Size 0 

of sloth at the end of each of his next turns by 
8 Veteran Size 1to 2 making a Spirit roll. 
11 Heroic Size 3 to 4 Success with speed doubles the target's 
15 Legendary Size 5to 10 movement (basic Pace and running). With 

a raise the character also ignores the -2 
With a raise on the roll, the character running penalty. 

transforms into a particularly large version 
of its type — increase its Strength and Vigor MODIFIERS 

by one die type each. = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): Speed only. 
The power may affect more than one target 

Weapons and other personal effects are 
for 1 additional Power Point each. 

assumed into the animal's form and reappear 
when the power ends, but other objects = AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): Sloth only. For 

are dropped. +2 points the power affects everyone in a 
Medium Blast Template. For +3 points the 

While transformed, the character retains his 
area of effect is increased to a Large Blast 

own Smarts, Spirit, Hindrances, Edges, and 
Template. 

linked skills (though he may not be able to use 
some or all of them depending on the form — ® QUICKNESS (+2): Speed only. The character's 
GM's call). He gains the animal's Agility, total Multi-Action penalty each turn is 
Strength, Vigor, and linked skills and cannot reduced by 2 (she can do two actions at no 
use most devices that require humanoid form. penalty or three at -2 each). 
He has no capacity for speech and cannot use = STRONG (+1): Sloth only. The Spirit roll to 
his own powers, though he may continue to shake off sloth’s effects is made at —2. 
maintain powers previously activated. 
A creature’s natural abilities inherent to SLOW/SPEED 

its form are conferred, but magical ones See Sloth/Speed, page 167. 
aren't. A dragon can fly and breathe fire in 
a traditional fantasy setting, for example, so 
a character who shape changes into one may Rank: Seasoned 
do so as well. If dragons also cast spells in Power Points: 2 
that world, however, shape change would not Range: Smarts 
grant that ability because it's not inherent to Duration: One hour 

the physical form. Trappings:A lullaby, blowing powder or 
sand at targets. 

Size: The caster does not inherit extra 
Wounds when transforming into creatures of Those who favor stealth or want to avoid 
Large, Huge, or Gargantuan Scale (page 179). harming their foes are drawn to this spell, 

which puts its victims into a deep and 
MODIFIERS restful sleep. 
um SPEECH (+1): The recipient retains the 

Anyone affected by slumber must make a 
power of speech. 

Spirit roll (at-2 if the caster got a raise on her 
arcane skill roll). Those who fail fall asleep 



for the Duration of the spell. Very loud noises Silence does the opposite, muting all 
or attempts to physically wake a sleeper (by sound up to a loud shout within a Large 
shaking him, for example), grant another Blast Template. A raise on the roll mutes 
Spirit roll. all sound, no matter how loud. Those with 

Arcane Background (Magic) and Arcane 
MODIFIERS 

Background (Miracle) cannot activate powers 
= AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): For +2 points the 

while silenced. 
power affects everyone in a Medium Blast 
Template. For +3 points the area of effect is MODIFIERS 
increased to a Large Blast Template. ® MOBILE (+1): The caster can move the area 

of effect up to his arcane skill die type each 
SMITE round. 

* Rank: Novice ® TARGETED (+1): Instead of casting silence 
Power Points: 2 in an area of effect, the caster may instead 
Range: Smarts target individuals in Range for 1 Power 
Duration: 5 Point each. Each victim resists with Spirit 
Trappings: A colored glow, runes, sigils, (at-2if the power is activated with a raise). 

crackling energy, barbs grow from the 
blade. SPEAK LANGUAGE 

This power is cast on a weapon of some Rank: Novice 
sort. If it's a ranged weapon, it affects one Power Points: 1 
entire magazine, 20 bolts, shells, or arrows, Range: Smarts 
or one full “load” of ammunition (the GM Duration: 10 minutes 
determines the exact quantity for unusual Trappings: Words, pictures, hand motions. 
weapons). While the power is in effect, the This power allows a character to speak, read, 
weapon's damage is increased by +2, or +4 and write a sapient language other than his 
with a raise. own. A raise on the arcane skill roll allows 

MODIFIERS the user to appropriately use and understand 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power slang and dialect as well. 
may affect more than one target for 1 MODIFIERS 
additional Power Point each. = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 

may affect more than one target for 1 
SOUND/SILENGE additional Power Point each. 
Rank: Novice 
Power Points: 1 
Range: Smarts x5 (sound); Smarts (silence) Rank: Novice 
Duration: Instant (sound); 5 (silence) Power Points: 2 
Trappings: Magical effects, a brief ripple in Range: Smarts 

the air, a bell or chime that starts or stops Duration: Instant 
ringing. Trappings: Bolts of energy, stun bombs, 

Sound mimics any known sound or voice, sonic booms, burst of blinding light. 
emanating from a point of origin within Stun shocks a target with concussive force, 
Range at a volume up to the sound of a loud sound, light, magical energy, or the like. 
shout. If used as a Test, the defender opposes 

A successful casting means the victim must 
the casting roll with Smarts. 

make a Vigor roll (at -2 with a raise on the 
arcane skill roll) or be Stunned (see 106). 

“| coNCEDE Houz- WED MODIFIERS 
Science Boom Box = AREA OF EFFECT (+2/+3): For +2 points the 

16 AN EFFECTIVE USE power affects everyone in a Medium Blast 

oF STUN, GAPE” Template. For +3 points the area of effect is 
increased to a Large Blast Template. 

—RED 

168 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



— FITTV —— 
SUGCOR EE 
See Relief, page 166. ATTENDANT : 

Attributes: Agility d4, Smarts d4, Spirit d4, 
SUMMON ALLY Strength d4, Vigor d4 
Rank: Novice Skills: Athletics d4, Fighting d4, Notice d4, 
Power Points: 2+ Shooting d4, Stealth d6 
Range: Smarts Pace: 4; Parry: 4; Toughness: 4 
Duration: 5 Special Abilities: 
Trappings: A clay figure that grows = Claw: Str+d4. 

into a servant, a tattoo that comes to u Construct: +2 to recover from being 
life. Shaken; ignore 1 point of Wound penalties; 

This power allows the character to doesn’t breathe, immune to poison and 
summon a magical servant from nothing. disease. 
The ally typically takes the form of a u Fearless: Immune to fear and Intimidation. 
basic humanoid of the appropriate Size 
but can appear differently based on 
the caster’s trappings. It materializes Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit dé, 
anywhere in Range, and with a raise on Strength d6, Vigor d6 
the arcane skill roll, it’s Resilient as well. Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d6, Intimida- 

tion d6, Notice d4, Shooting d4, Stealth d4 
The ally acts on its creator's Action 

Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 7(2) 
Card and follows her commands to the Edges: First Strike 
best of its ability. It has no personality, Gear: Melee attack (Str+d6). 
creativity, or emotions. When the power Special Abilities: 
ends or the ally is Incapacitated, it fades = Armor +2: Hardened skin. 
into nothingness, leaving no trace behind. 

® Construct: See Attendant. 
The type of servant that can be ® Fearless: Immune to fear and Intimidation. 

summoned depends on the caster’s 
Rank. With the GM's approval, the 
player may swap abilities. If a hero The ally is a clone of the caster except: it’s 
wants an attendant in the form of a wolf, an Extra; it has the same number of current 
for example, the caster might exchange Power Points as the caster after subtracting 
the Shooting skill for Survival so that the for this casting; it cannot use the sunimon 
“animal” can track its foes. ally power; its skills (but not attributes) 

are one die type less (minimum d4) than 
SUMMON ALLY the original; it has identical mundane 

RANK COST SERVANT equipment (no magical qualities, disappears 
when the power expires); has the Construct 

Novice 2 Attendant 
and Fearless abilities. 

Seasoned 4 Bodyguard 

Veteran [4 Mirror Self* SENTINEL | 
Heroic 8 Sentinel Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6, Spirit d8, 

Strength d12+2, Vigor d10 
*Mirror Self costs +2 power points per Rank Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d10, Intimida- 
above Veteran to a maximum of 10 PPs at 

tion d10, Notice d8 
Legendary. 

Pace: 6; Parry: 7; Toughness: 13(4) 

MODIFIERS Edges: Arcane Resistance, Sweep (Imp). 
u BITE/CLAW (+1): The ally can bite or Gear: Melee attack (Str+d8). 
claw at Str+d6. Special Abilities: 

® FLIGHT (+2): The ally can fly at Pace 12. = Armor +4: Stone skin. 
= Construct: See Attendant. 

us MIND RIDER (+1): The caster can 
m Fearless: Immune to fear and Intimidation. 

communicate and sense through the m Size 2: Sentinels are 8’ tall and very dense. 
ally. 

— 
he —— 



an opposed Spirit roll against the arcane 
Rank: Seasoned skill total and is sent up to 12" away with 
Power Points: 5 success and 24" with a raise. Foes may not 
Range: Smarts x2 be teleported into solid objects. 
Duration: 5 
Trappings:A wave of the hand, magic wand, WALL WALKER 

steely gaze. Rank: Novice 

Telekinesis is the ability to move objects or Power Points: 2 

creatures (including oneself) with arcane will. Range: Smarts 
Duration: 5 

It has a Strength of d10, or d12 with a raise. 
Trappings: Spider-like visage, prickly hairs 

Unwilling opponents resist the caster’s on hands and feet. 
arcane skill with an opposed Spirit roll when 
targeted and at the start of each of their turns Wall walker allows the recipient to walk on 

vertical or horizontal surfaces. With success, 
afterward until they're released. They can be 
moved up to the caster’s Smarts per turn in she moves at half her normal Pace. With a 

raise, she may move at full Pace and even run. 
any direction, and can be bashed into walls, 
ceilings, or other obstacles for Str+d6 damage. If forced to make an Athletics roll to climb or 

hang on to a surface, she adds +4 to the total. 
Dropped creatures suffer falling damage 

as usual. MODIFIERS 

Telekinetic Tools: A caster can wield tools = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The caster 

(including weapons) with felekinesis as an may affect others at the cost of 1 Power 
action. Use the caster’s relevant skill when Point each. 
attacking in this way (not his arcane skill). 

WARRIOR'S GIFT 
TELEPORT Rank: Seasoned 
Rank: Seasoned Power Points: 4 
Power Points: 2 Range: Smarts 
Range: Smarts Duration: 5 
Duration: Instant Trappings: Gestures, prayer, whispered 
Trappings:A  cloud of smoke, “phasing” out, words, concentration. 

change into a bolt of lightning. With a successful arcane skill roll, the recip- 

Teleport allows a character to disappear and ient gains the benefits of a single Combat 
instantly reappear up to 12" (24 yards) distant, Edge chosen by the caster. The caster (not the 
or double that with a raise. Teleporting to an recipient) must have the same Rank or higher 
unseen location incurs a -2 penalty on the as the Edge’s Requirements. With a raise, the 
arcane skill roll. recipient gains the Improved version of the 

Edge (if there is one, and even if he doesn’t 
Opponents adjacent to a character who 

teleports away don’t get a free attack (see meet the Rank Requirement). 

Withdrawing from Melee, page 109). MODIFIERS 

If casting teleport on a willing subject, the = ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power 

caster decides where they move to, not the may affect more than one target for 1 
target. additional Power Point each. 

MODIFIERS 10MBIE 
= ADDITIONAL RECIPIENTS (+1): The power Rank: Veteran 
may affect more than one target for 1 Power Points: 3 (See sidebar for large 
additional Power Point each. creatures) 

su TELEPORT FOE (+2): Foes may be targeted Range: Smarts 
by a Touch attack (page 108). This is an Duration: One hour 
action, so the casting must be the second Trappings: Carving symbols on corpses, 
part of a Multi-Action if the attack is throwing bones, graveyards, “leather” 
successful. The foe resists the casting with books. 

170 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



Zombie grants animation and basic intelli- um MIND RIDER (+1): The caster can commun- 
gence to the remains of a once-living being. icate and sense through one of the undead 
The summoned horror is obedient but literal- he’s conjured. If it's destroyed, he may 
minded in its duties. It isn’t telepathic, and jump to any of the others currently under 
must be controlled by voice. his control. 
The being has the physical skills it had in ® PERMANENT (1): The zombie is given unlife 

life, but its Smarts, Spirit, and related skills until destroyed (Incapacitated by Wounds). 
are reset to d4. A raise on the casting roll This has no additional cost, but the Power 
increases any one of their Traits by one die Points used to raise it are invested and 
type (caster’s choice). unavailable until it's destroyed. The 
See page 191 for the standard profile of a necromancer who raised it may terminate 

human zombie. Corpses aren’t summoned by its unlife at any time. 
this ability, so there must actually be a supply 
of bodies in Range (GM's call). 

An undead servant Incapacitated by [OMBIE CREATURES 
damage can’t be raised with this power Animals and other creatures can also be 
aga—itnhe remaining raw materials are raised with this foul ability! The cost is 2 
essentially destroyed. for a creature of Size -1 or -2, 3 for Size 0, 

and 1 for a Small Swarm, 2 for a Medium 
MODIFIERS 

Swarm, or 3 for a Large Swarm. 
= ADDITIONAL ZOMBIES (+1): A larger horde 
can be raised in a single casting by paying Larger creatures cost 3 + Size in Power 
an additional 1 Power Point for each extra Points. For example, an undead grizzly 
zombie raised. (Size 3) costs 6 Power Points to raise. 

® ARMED (+1 per Zombie): The dead rise with Magical or supernatural Special Abilities 
a rusting weapon common to their setting aren’t conferred to the undead form, but 

and environment. Choose one: those inherent to the creature are, such 
as Improved Frenzy, Reach, a swarm'’s 

* Hand Weapon: Str+d6. 
attack, etc. 

* Ranged Weapon: Range 12/24/48, 
Damage 2d6. Additional zombie creatures cost half 

their base cost if raised at once, instead 
= ARMOR (+1 per Zombie): The horrors crawl 

of the +1 listed for Additional Zombies 
from their grave wearing 2 points of Armor. 

(round up, minimum of 1). 
This might be old chain mail, rusting plate, 
rotting bulletproof vests, etc. 



[72] 
[=] a _— se al a" a at = _w 
1 
[+4 
o POWERS 
S POWER 
[=] RANK POINTS RANGE DUR SUMMARY 

& Enemy casters subtract 2 (4 with a raise) when 

= Arcane Protection Sm targeting this character; reduces damage a 
like amount. 

0 
Banish Sm Opposed roll vs Spirit to banish entities. 

Creates 5" (10 yards) long, 1" (2 yards) tall, 
Barrier Sm 

Hardness 10 barrier. 

Beast Friend Sm 10m Controls animals. 

Blast Smx2 1 2d6 damage in Medium Blast Template. 

Blind Sm Inflicts 2/4 penalty to victims. 

Bolt Smx2 2d6 ranged attack. 

Boost/Lower Trait Sm 5/1 Increases or decreases a skill or attribute. 

Burrow Sm Target tunnels through the earth. 

Burst Cone Cone-shaped attack for 2d6 damage. 

Confusion Sm Makes target Distracted and Vulnerable. 

Damage Field Sm Creates aura that causes 2d4 damage. 

Ignore up to 4 points of illumination penalties, 
Darksight Sm 1H 

or 6 with a raise. 

Deflection Sm -2/-4 to attack recipient. 

Detect/Conceal Detects magic for Duration 5 or conceals it 
Sm 

Arcana for one hour. 

Disguise Sm 10m Target looks like someone else. 

Dispel Sm Negates magical effects. 

Divination Self 5m Caster asks questions of entities. 

Drain Power Drains d6 Power Points from enemy with 
Sm 

Points successful opposed roll of arcane skills. 

Elemental Allows minor manipulation of basic 
Sm 

Manipulation elements. 

Opposed roll vs Spirit to add +2 to social 
Empathy Sm 

attacks for the Duration of the power. 

Entangle Sm Bind or Entangle foes. 

Environmental 
Sm 1H Protect target from hazardous environments. 

Protection 

See detail at great distance; halves Range 
Farsight Sm 

penalties with a raise. 

Fear Sm Causes Fear check. 

Fly Sm Target flies at Pace 12". 

Growth/Shrink Sm Increases or decreases Size. 

Targets in MBT or Cone are Distracted and 
Havoc Sm 

may be hurled. 

Healing Restores Wounds. 

Hlusion Sm Creates imaginary images. 

172 

zizl Zz [0 «=z z Zz Zz < IT «ww ZH Z BZN » [Zl Z |Z) Z [Z) Z [of Z -! zZ 

[1 wn WkRN  [= SF TS I5]  [1 

On Une wl un ur wi Ln ~~ in 



POWER 
POWER RANK POINTS RANGE DUR SUMMARY 

Intangibility H Sm 5 Target becomes incorporeal. 

Invisibility Sm 5 Target is invisible (—4/-6 to affect). 

Light/Darkness Sm 10m Creates or dispels illumination. 

Mind Link Sm 30m Mental link within one mile (5 with raise). 

Mind Reading Sm I Opposed roll vs Smarts to read mind. 

Mind Wipe Sm 1 Removes and alters memories. 

Reveals last five years of an object's history 
Object Reading T S 

(100 years with a raise). 

Protection Sm 5 Grants Armor +2/+4. 

Puppet Sm 5 Opposed roll vs Spirit to control target. 

Relief Sm 1 Removes Fatigue, Shaken; & Stun with raise. 

Resurrection T I Brings the dead back to life. 

Shape Change Self Sm 5 Caster takes on the form of various beings. 

Sloth/Speed Sm 1/5 Increases or decreases movement. 

Slumber Sm 1H Puts victims to sleep. 

Smite Sm 5 Increase a weapon's damage by +2/+4. 

Sound/Silence Sm/Smx5 1/5 Create or mute sound. 

Speak Language Sm 10m Caster can speak and understand languages. 

Stun Sm 1 Target is Stunned. 

Summon Ally Special Sm 5 Conjures an ally of various sorts. 

Moves items with Strength of d10 (d12 with 
Telekinesis 5 Smx2 5 

a raise). 

Teleport 2 Sm I Character teleports up to 12" distant. 

Character can walk on walls at half Pace (full 
‘Wall Walker Sm 5 

Pace with raise). 

Warrior's Gift Sm 5 Grant target a Combat Edge. 

Zombie Sm 1H Raises and controls the undead. 

Zz wm tl ZZ ZZ Zinn zl TZ << FZ) wo» til 7 S72) 7 Nery 

alI  LW Mo = NW; 






CHAPTER SIN 
gar 

Great heroes are often defined by the foes, BITE 
monsters, and other horrors they face. In this See Natural Weapons, page 104. 
chapter are a number of the most common 
threats across the many Savage Worlds. BREATH WEAPONS 

Dragons and other “fire breathers” use a 
DESIGNING THREATS Cone Template for their attacks (see Area 
Nonplayer characters and monsters should Effect attacks on page 97). Breath attacks 
have any Edges or Hindrances the GM may be Evaded (page 100). 
feels are appropriate. They are not created 

Unless the creature's description says 
like player characters (though they should 

otherwise, breath attacks take the creature's 
generally have the prerequisites of any Edges 

entire tu—rthney can’t perform Multi- 
for completeness). Otherwise, give them the 

Actions in the same round they make a 
abilities you want them to have and spend 

breath attack. 
your time and energy on the plot of the game 
or how best to entertain your group. 

From massive worms to sand-dwelling 
SPEGIAL ABILITIES humanoids, many creatures are able to 

burrow beneath the earth and move within it. 
AQUATIE Burrowers can tunnel underground and 
The creature is native to the water. It is a reappear elsewhere for devastating surprise 
natural swimmer and cannot drown. Its Pace attacks against their foes. The distance a 
in water is specified after the Aquatic ability. creature can burrow on its turn is written 

immediately after its Burrow ability. 
ARMOR 

A burrowing creature may tunnel on its 
A creature’s Armor is written in parentheses 

action, and may erupt from the ground at any 
next to its total Toughness, and already 

point within its burrowing Pace in the same 
added in. Thick, leathery hide generally 

turn. It cannot be attacked while beneath the 
offers 2 points of Armor. Creatures like a 

earth unless the attacker has some special 
stegosaurus generally have 4 or more points 

means of detecting it and penetrating the 
of protection. Supernatural creatures may 

intervening dirt. 
have much higher Armor values. A living 
statue, for example, might have 8 points of Burrowing creatures erupt from beneath 
Armor or more. their opponents and may take them by 

surprise. If the target was unaware of the 



burrower’s presence, the creature makes Damage from the source is increased by 
an opposed Stealth roll versus the victim's 4, and the being subtracts 4 when resisting 
Notice. If the burrower wins, the target matching Hazards or powers with a similar 
is Vulnerable to it only. With a raise, the Trapping. 
burrower gets the Drop. Targets on Hold may 
attempt to interrupt the attack before it occurs. ETHEREAL 
Burrowers can’t usually surprise a foe once Ghosts, shadows, will-o’-the-wisps, and 

their presence is known, but can still burrow similar intangible creatures have no form in 

for protection and mobility. the physical world (or can turn it on and off at 
will). They can pass through physical objects, 

GLAWS cannot be harmed by non-magical attacks, 
See Natural Weapons, page 104. and cannot even be seen unless they desire to 

be. Ethereal creatures are affected by magical 
items, weapons, and supernatural powers. 

Robots, golems, and other animated objects Unless its description says otherwise, 
are collectively called “constructs.” Some ethereal creatures can throw objects, wield 
are sentient beings while others are mere weapons, or even push terrified heroes down 
automatons following the will of their masters. long, dark stairs. 

Whatever their origin or material, 
constructs have several inherent advantages 
over creatures of flesh and blood. Particularly frightening monsters cause 

Fear checks to all who see them. Some truly 
Constructs add +2 when attempting to 

terrifying monsters may inflict penalties on 
recover from being Shaken, ignore 1 point of 

Fear checks as well. A creature with Fear -2, 
Wound penalties, don’t breathe or eat and are 

for instance, causes those who see it to make 
immune to disease and poison, don’t Bleed 

their Fear checks at 2. See the Fear rules on 
Out, and Wounds are removed with Repair 

page 124 for effects. 
instead of Healing with no “Golden Hour.” 

ELEMENTAL FEARLESS 
Mindless creatures, some undead, robots, 

Air, earth, fire, and water form the basis of 
and the like don’t suffer from the weaknesses 

the elemental realms, wherein dwell strange, 
of the mortal mind. Fearless creatures are 

unfathomable creatures. 
immune to Fear effects and Intimidation. 

Elementals have bodies of pure earth, They may still be Taunted, however (usually 
water, air, or fire and thus ignore additional because it draws their attention rather than 
damage from Called Shots, ignore 1 point of causing emotional distress). 
Wound penalties, don’t breathe or eat and are 
immune to disease and poison, can only be FLIGHT 
healed via magic or natural healing. The creature can fly at the listed Pace. It uses 

its Athletics to maneuver in chases or other 
ENVIRONMENTAL RESISTANGE situations. 
The creature is resistant (but not immune) to 
a particular type of energy or substance, such 
as cold, heat, iron, etc. Gargantuan creatures are those that are 
Damage from the source is reduced by at least Size 12 or higher. Classic movie 

4, and the being adds +4 to resist matching monsters like Godzilla fall into this category. 
Hazards or powers with a similar Trapping. Gargantuans have Heavy Armor, can take 

three additional Wounds, and their attacks 
ENVIRONMENTAL WEAKNESS count as Heavy Weapons. 
The creature is susceptible to a particular type 

Stomp: A Gargantuan creature may stomp 
of energy or substance, such as cold, heat, 

by using an area effect template (the size 
iron, etc. 

of the template is determined by the GM 
based on the monster's “footprint”). The 

176 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



attack ignores Scale modifiers and is an INVULNERABILITY 
opposed Athletics vs Agility roll (defenders Some Savage Tales feature invulnerable 
roll individually). Those who can’t get out of horrors that can only be defeated by 
the way are stomped for damage equal to the discovering their weakness. 
thing's Strength damage. 

Invulnerable creatures ignore damage as 
listed in their description. Unless otherwise 
specified, they can be Shaken or Stunned but 

Very tough or determined creatures do not 
not Wounded by other forms of damage. An 

fall from lesser injuries, no matter how many 
ancient dark god given life by misguided 

they suffer. A decisive blow is needed to put 
cultists, for example, might only be 

one of these tenacious creatures down. 
vulnerable to shards of stained glass gathered 

If the beast is Shaken, another Shaken result from a church. 
doesn’t cause a Wound. 

LOW LIGHT VISION 
Low Light Vision ignores penalties for 

See Natural Weapons, page 104. Dim and Dark Illumination (but not Pitch 
Darkness). 

IMMUNITY 
Creatures born in fire aren't affected by heat, 
and a horror made of pure lightning won't Paralyzing poisons are covered under Poison, 
suffer from a bolt attack with an electrical below. Other creatures might paralyze their 
trapping. Immunities are to specific types of victims with magic, electricity, or other 
attacks, such as fire, cold, electricity, and so sources. Victims who suffer damage or a 
on. Such creatures don’t have Invulnerability Shaken result from such a creature must 
(see below), they just ignore damage and Stun make a Vigor roll or be Stunned. They're 
results from the specific attack types named. also paralyzed and incapable of any action — 

even speech — for 2d6 rounds (or longer if 
otherwise specified). 

A vampire’s bite, a horrid spider-like creature 
that injects eggs into its victim's skin, or even 
the disease-born scratching of rats are all Snakes, spiders, and other creatures inject 
examples of Infection. poisonous venom via bite or scratch. To do so, 
A character Shaken or Wounded by a the thing must cause at least a Shaken result 

creature with Infection must make a Vigor to the victim, who then makes a Vigor roll 
roll. Modifiers to the roll are listed in the modified by the strength of the poison (listed 
creature’s description, as are the effects in parentheses after the creature’s Poison 
of failure. ability). Effects of failure are described in 

more detail in the Hazards section (page 128). 

Nocturnal beasts often see in the infrared REGENERATION 
spectrum — meaning they can “see” by Legend has it that trolls, vampires, and 
detecting heat. Creatures with Infravision certain other types of legendary creatures can 
halve penalties for bad lighting when Regenerate damage caused to them. 
attacking targets that radiate warmth Regeneration comes in two types: Fast and 
(including invisible foes). Slow. 
Clever characters may figure out ways to = FAST: Wounded creatures make a Vigor 

mask their heat from such creatures. Smearing roll every round — even after they've been 
cold mud over one’s body or wearing special Incapacitated. A success heals one Wound 
heat-filtering suits generally obscures the (or removes Incapacitated status), and a 
target from those with Infravision. raise heals an additional Wound. Wounds 
Humanoids with Infravision usually have caused by some types of damage, listed in 

normal sight as well. the creature’s description, donot regenerate 
but may still heal naturally. Trolls cannot 

— 

AHVYILS3g 



regenerate Wounds caused by flame, for TENTAGLES 
example. Tentacles (or appendages that function like 

® SLOW: The creature makes a natural healing tentacles) may make a number of attacks each 
roll once per day. round at no penalty. The specific number is 

listed in the beast’s description. 
RESILIENT/VERY RESILIENT Tentacles cause the creature’s Strength 
Elite Extras are tougher than usual. This in damage, and add +2 to grappling rolls, 
might include specially bred orcs in a fantasy including those made to hold onto Entangled 
setting, particularly tough thugs or agents in prey (see Grappling, page 101) 
the modern world, or even mutant animals 

Severing a tentacle is a Called Shot at 2. 
created in the lab of some mad scientist. 

If damage exceeds the creature's Toughness, 
Resilient Extras can take one Wound before the limb is severed and the monster is Shaken. 

they're Incapacitated, Very Resilient Extras If it was already Shaken, it takes a Wound. 
can take two. Wild Cards can’t be Resilient 

Attacking a tentacle that has Bound or 
or Very Resilient. The abilities exist to bring 

Entangled a friend is just like attacking 
select Extras a little closer to the heroes and 

characters in melee and uses the Innocent 
villains who lead them. 

Bystander rule (page 102). 

Size grants a bonus to Toughness (or penalty 
Zombies, skeletons, and similar physical 

for small creatures) and is a guide to the typical 
horrors are particularly difficult to destroy. 

Strength of creatures in that general range. 
Below are the benefits of being such an 

Size is generally based on mass, but abomination. 
exceptions exist for extremely large but weak 

* Add +2 to Toughness and Spirit rolls to 
creatures, small but strong beings, etc. 

recover from being Shaken, ignore addi- 
Scale Modifiers are explained under Size & tional damage from Called Shots, ignore 1 

Scale on page 106. point of Wound penalties, don’t breathe or 
Additional Wounds: Large creatures can eat and are immune to disease and poison, 

take an additional Wound, Huge can take don’t Bleed Out, and can only be healed 
two, and Gargantuan three. The maximum with magical healing. 
Wound penalty is always three. This stacks 
with Resilient/ Very Resilient (see above). 

Some creatures have the ability to walk on 
Such creatures typically have Reach equal 

walls. They automatically walk on vertical or 
to the additional Wounds granted by Size. 

inverted surfaces just as a human walks on 
the earth. 

A creature with this ability often has an A Wall Walker's movement rate when 
electrical attack, mild toxin, mind lash, or walking on walls is its standard Pace. It may 
similar trapping. When it successfully hits a run as usual when walking on walls unless 
character (even if it causes no damage), she the specific creature’s text says otherwise. 
must make a Vigor roll minus any listed 
penalties or be Stunned (page 106). 

Some creatures suffer additional damage 
SWAT or can only be hurt by their Weakness. A 
The creature has learned how to deal with creature made of ice, for example, might take 
pesky creatures smaller than itself. It ignores double damage from fire. See the creature’s 
up 4 points of Scale penalties when attacking description for particular effects. 
with certain abilities listed in its description 
(and only those specific abilities). 

178 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



SIZE TABLE 

Use the examples below to estimate the Size of creatures not included inthe Bestiary. Massis usually enough 
to determine its Size and Toughness bonus, but account for overall dimensions as makes sense. 

Tiny creatures have a Strength score of1. They can't make a Strength roll (and therefore can't Ace or get bonus 
damage). They can damage creatures with a Toughness of 1, but can only harm Small or larger beings if they 
swarm together (see Swarms, page 189). 

TYPICAL 
SIZE | TYPICAL HEIGHT/ 

TOUGHNESS STRENGTH SCALE LENGTH MASS EXAMPLE 
BONUS RANGE MODIFIER UPTO... UPTO... CREATURES 

TINY 

-4 1 -6 6" <4 lbs Crow, mouse 

a TR TE —— 
=3 d4-3 -4 18" 161bs ~~ House cat, small dogs 

-2 d4-1 -2 3 321bs Coyote, bobcat, porcupine 

=1 d4 to dé a 4 1251bs Child, wolf, half-folk, goblin 

0 dé6todl2 — 6 2501bs Human, Great Dane, dire wolf 

1 d8 to d12+1 — § 5001bs Large human, gorilla, lion, orc 

2 d10 to d12+2 —- 9’ 10001bs Grizzly, horse, ogre, tiger shark 

3 di12 to d12+3 _— 12 20001bs Bull, war horse 

LARGE (+1 WOUND) 
4 d12+1 to d12+4 +2 15 2tons Hippo, great white shark 

5 d12+2 to d12+5 +2 18" 4tons White rhino, beluga whale 

6 d12+3 to d12+6 +2 24 8tons African elephant, drake, orca 

7 d12+4 to d12+7 +2 30 l6tons T-Rex, triceratops 

HUGE (+2 WOUNDS) 

8 d12+5 to d12+48 +4 36 32tons Dragon, sperm whale 

9 d12+6 to d12+9 +4 50 64tons Humpback whale 

10 d12+7 to d12+10 +4 63 125tons Bowhead whale 

11 d12+8 to d12+11 +4 75 250 tons Blue whale [=] 

3 
12 d12+9 to d12+12 +6 100° 500 tons Kaiju or giant monsters | 

13 d12+10 to d12+13 +6 125 1K tons B 

14 d12+11 to d12+14 +6 150 2K tons +; 

15 d12+12 to d12+15 +6 2000 4K tons 

16 d12+13 to d12+16 +6 250 8K tons 

17 d12+14 to d12+17 +6 300° 16K tons 

18 d12+15 to d12+18 +6 400 32K tons 

19 d12+16 to d12+19 +6 500° 64K tons 

20 d12+17 to d12+20 +6 600 125K tons 



BESTIARY 
: This entry covers the larger ursines, such as 

grizzlies, Kodiaks, and polar bears. A favored 
This section contains animals and monsters tactic of all these bears is to grapple and bite 
common to many Savage Settings. Note that with their fierce fangs. 
for some creatures, Smarts is listed relative 

Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6 (A), Spirit d8, 
to the animal world, and is thus followed 

Strength d12+2, Vigor d12 
by an (A) to remind you that this is animal 

Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d8, Notice d8, 
intelligence, not human intelligence, so don’t 

Stealth d8 
expect a dog to drive a car just because it’s a 

Pace: 8; Parry: 6; Toughness: 10 
relatively smart animal. 

Edges: Brute 
Special Abilities: 

ALLIGATOR/GROGODILE = Bite/Claws: Str+d6. 
Alligators and crocodiles are staples of most =m Size 2: These creatures can stand up to 8’ 
pulp-genre adventure games. The statistics tall and weigh over 1,000 pounds. 
here represent an average specimen of either 
species. Much larger versions are often found 
in more remote areas. Bulls are usually only aggressive toward 
Attributes: Agility d4, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d6, humans when enraged. Of course, if you're 

Strength d10, Vigor d10 looking up the statistics here, it's probably 
Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d8, Notice d8, already seeing red. 

Stealth d8 Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d8, 
Pace: 3; Parry: 6; Toughness: 10 (2) Strength d12+3, Vigor d12 
Edges: — Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d4, Notice d6 
Special Abilities: Pace: 7; Parry: 4; Toughness: 11 
® Armor +2: Thick skin. Edges: — 
® Aquatic: Pace 5. Special Abilities: 
= Bite: Str+d6. = Horns: Str+d6. 
= Rollover: Gators and crocs grasp prey in = Size 3: Most bulls weigh just under a ton. 
their vice-like jaws and roll with them. If 
one of these large reptiles hits with a raise, 
its bonus damage is a d10 instead of a dé. 

= Size 1: Common gators 
are about 6 to 7’ long, 
thick, heavy, and 
weigh just under 
500 Ibs. 

180 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



GAT, SMALL © WILD CARD MONSTERS 
This is an ordinary house cat, the sort that Creatures noted with this symbol are 
might be a familiar for a spellcaster, a Beast usually Wild Cards: @. They roll a Wild 
Master's animal friend, or an alternate form Die with their Trait checks and can take 
for the shape change power. three Wounds. 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d6 (A), Spirit d10, Some creatures should almost always be 

Strength d4-2, Vigor d6 Wild Cards, like dragons or liches. They 
Skills: Athletics d8, Notice d6, Stealth d8 ~ have unique names, backgrounds, and 
Pace: 6; Parry: 2; Toughness: 2 ~ stories, and are often the “boss monsters” 
Edges: Acrobat i of the adventure. 
Special Abilities: ‘The GM can always change that if the 
= Bite/Claws: Str. 

eings are common in a setting, but this 
= Low Light Vision: Cats ignore penalties for 
Dim and Dark Illumination. 

® Size -3 (Very Small): Cats are typically less 
than a foot high. 

Q DRAGON 
Dire wolves are very large and feral canines 

Dragons are fire-breathing monsters that 
often used by orcs as attack dogs. They may 

bring doom and despair to the villages they 
also be found roaming in packs in the deepest, 

ravage. Such creatures should not be fought 
darkest woods. 

lightly as they are more thana match for even 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d6, a party of experienced adventurers. These 

Strength d8, Vigor d8 beasts are quite intelligent as well, and use 
Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d8, Intimida- all of their advantages when confronted by 

tion d8, Notice d6, Stealth d8 would-be dragon-slayers. 
Pace: 10; Parry: 6; Toughness: 6 

Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d8, Spirit d10, 
Edges: Alertness 

Strength d12+8, Vigor d12 
Special Abilities: 

Skills: Athletics d10, Common Knowledge d6, 
= Bite: Str+d6. 

Fighting d10, Intimidation d12, Notice d12, 
= Speed: d10 running die. 

Persuasion d10, Stealth d8 
Pace: 8; Parry: 7; Toughness: 20 (4) 

DOG/WOLF Edges: Frenzy (Imp), Level Headed 
The stats below are for large attack dogs, such Special Abilities: 
as Rottweilers and Doberman Pinschers, as = Armor +4: Scaly hide. 
well as wolves, hyenas, and the like. = Bite/Claws: Str+d8. 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts dé (A), Spirit d6, m Fear (<2): Anyone who sees a mighty 

Strength dé, Vigor dé dragon must make a Fear check at -2. 

Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d6, Notice d10, = Fiery Breath: Dragons breathe fire for 3d6 
Stealth d8 damage (see Breath Weapons, page 175). 

Pace: 8; Parry: 5; Toughness: 4 = Flight: Dragons have a Flying Pace of 24". 
Edges: Alertness = Hardy: The creature does not suffer a 
Special Abilities: Wound from being Shaken twice. 
= Bite: Str+d4. = Size 8 (Huge): Dragons are massive crea- 

® Size ~1: The heads of these canines come to tures, over 40’ long from nose to tail and 
an average human's waist, and they weigh weighing over 30,000 pounds. 
about 60 pounds. = Swat: Dragons ignore up to 4 points of Scale 

= Speed: d10 running die. penalties when attacking with their claws. 
® Tail Lash: Str+d4. The creature may make a 

free attack against up to two foes to its side 
or rear at no penalty. 

AYVILS3H 



ELEMENTALS 
72) Drakes are non-flying dragons with animal Elementals are living spirits of earth, fire, 
[=] intelligence (rather than the more human-like water, or air. Below are lesser versions of 
ol 
[= sentience of true dragons). They are much such creatures, but many more powerful 
Oo more aggressive in direct combat than their varieties exist. 

S distant cousins, however. 
[% AIR ELEMENTAL 
= | Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6 (A), Spirit d10, 

Air elementals manifest as sentient 
Strength d12+6, Vigor d12 

whirlwinds. 
Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d10, Intimida- 

7) tion d12, Notice d8, Stealth d6 Attributes: Agility d12, Smarts d6, Spirit d6, 
Pace: 6; Parry: 7; Toughness: 18 (4) Strength d8, Vigor d6 
Edges: — Skills: Athletics d10, Fighting d8, Notice d8, 
Special Abilities: Shooting d6, Stealth d10 
= Armor +4: Scaly hide. Pace: —; Parry: 6; Toughness: 5 
= Bite/Claws: Str+d8. Edges: — 
u Fear: Drakes are frightening creatures to Special Abilities: 
behold. = Elemental: No additional damage from 
Fiery Breath: Drakes breathe fire for 3d6 Called Shots, ignores 1 point of Wound 
damage (see Breath Weapons, page 175). penalties, doesn’t breathe, immune to 

m Resilient: Drakes can take one Wound disease and poison. 
before they're Incapacitated. ® Gaseous Form: Can maneuver through 

m Size 6 (Large): Drakes are over 20" long any non-solid surface, pass through cracks 
from snout to tail. in doors or windows, bubble 

= Tail Lash: Str. The creature may make through water, etc. 
a free attack against up to two 
foes to its side or rear at no 
penalty. 



= Flight: Air elementals fly at Pace 12". u Fiery Touch: Str+d6, chance of catching 
® Invulnerability: Immune to non-magical Fire (see page 127). 
attacks. = Flame Strike: Can project a searing blast of 

m= Wind Blast: Air elementals can send flame using the Cone Template and their 
directed blasts of air to knock their foes Shooting skill. Characters within take 3d6 
away. They may choose one target or a and may catch Fire (see page 127). May 
Cone Template, and use their Shooting skill be Evaded. 
for the roll. Those affected make a Strength ® Immunity: Fire elementals are immune to 
roll (at -2 if the elemental gets a raise) or fire and heat-based attacks. 
are hurled 2d6". Anyone who strikes a hard 
object (such as a wall) takes 2d4 non-lethal WATER ELEMENTAL 
damage. These spirits are frothing, man-shaped 

beings of water. 
EARTH ELEMENTAL 

Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d6, Spirit d6, 
Earth elementals manifest as five-foot-tall, 

Strength d10, Vigor d10 
vaguely man-shaped collections of earth and 

Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d8, Notice d6, 
stone. Though strong, they are also quite slow 

Shooting d8, Stealth d8 
and ponderous. 

Pace: 6; Parry: 6; Toughness: 7 
Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit d6, Edges: — 

Strength d12, Vigor d10 Special Abilities: 
Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d8, Notice d4, ® Aquatic: Pace 12". 

Stealth d6 u Elemental: No additional damage from 
Pace: 4; Parry: 6; Toughness: 11 (4) Called Shots, ignores 1 point of Wound 
Edges: — penalties, doesn’t breathe, immune to 
Special Abilities: disease and poison. 
= Armor +4: Rocky hide. ® Immunity: Immune to water-based attacks. 
= Bash: Str+d6. =m Seep: Can squeeze through any porous gap 
= Burrow (10”): Earth elementals can meld as if it were Difficult Ground. 
into and out of the ground. = Slam: Str+d6, nonlethal damage. 

= Elemental: No additional damage from = Waterspout: Can project a torrent of water 
Called Shots, ignores 1 point of Wound using the Cone Template and their Shooting 
penalties, doesn’t breathe, immune to skill. Those within take 2d6 nonlethal 
disease and poison. damage. This may be Evaded. 

® Immunity: Immune to earth-based attacks 
(including thrown stones or powers with GHOST 
earth, mud, stone, or sand Trappings). Specters, shades, and phantoms sometimes 

= Resilient: Earth elementals can take one return from death to haunt the living or fulfill 
Wound before they're Incapacitated. some unfinished business. 

FIRE ELEMENTAL Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6, Spirit d10, 
Fire elementals appear as man-shaped flame. Strength d6, Vigor d6 

Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge d8, 
Attributes: Agility d12+1, Smarts d8, Spirit d8, 

Fighting d6, Intimidation d12, Notice d12, 
Strength d4, Vigor d6 

Stealth d12, Taunt d10 
Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d10, Notice d6, 

Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 5 
Shooting d8, Stealth d6 

Edges: — 
Pace: 6; Parry: 7; Toughness: 5 

Gear: Thrown objects (Str+d4). 
Edges: — 

Special Abilities: 
Special Abilities: 

® Ethereal: Ghosts can become invisible and 
u Elemental: No additional damage from 

immaterial at will and can only be harmed 
Called Shots, ignores 1 point of Wound 

by magical attacks. 
penalties, doesn’t breathe, immune to 

® Fear (2): Ghosts cause Fear checks at —2 
disease and poison. 

when they let themselves be seen. 

— 

AHVYILS3g 



VQ GIANT WORM ® Slam: Giant worms crush prey beneath 
: y their massive bodies. Lay three Small Blast 

Massive worms tunneling beneath the earth Templates adjacent to one another and in a 
to gobble up unsuspecting adventurers are straight line to represent the portion of the 
sometimes found in lonesome flatlands. The creature’s body used to crush. Everything 
things sense vibrations through the earth,  \(iithin must beat the worm in an opposed 
hearing a walking person at about 200 yards. Athletics versus Agility roll or take its Str 
The stats below are for a monster some 50 as damage. Ignore Scale modifiers when 
feet long. making a slam attack. 
Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6 (A), 

Spirit d10, Strength d12+9, Vigor d12 GOBLIN 
Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d6, Notice d10, Goblins of myth and legend are far more sin- 

Stealth d10 ister creatures than some games and fiction 
Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 21 (4) portray. In the original tales, they were 
Edges: — terrifying creatures that stole into homes 
Special Abilities: in the middle of the night to steal and eat 
= Armor +4: Scaly hide. unruly children. The statistics here work 
= Bite: Str+d8. for both dark “fairy tale” goblins as well as 
® Burrow (20”): Giant worms tunnel through those found alongside orcs in contemporary 
the ground, blocked only by solid bedrock. roleplaying games. 

um Hardy: The creature does not suffer a 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d6, Spirit d6, 

Wound from being Shaken twice. 
Strength d4, Vigor d6 

m Size 9 (Huge): Giant worms are usually 
Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge d10, 

over 50’ long and 10’ or more in diameter. 
Fighting d6, Notice d6, Persuasion d4, 
Shooting d8, Stealth d10, Taunt d6 

Pace: 5; Parry: 5; Toughness: 4 
Hindrances: Greedy (Major) 
Edges: — 
Gear: Short spears (Str+d4), 

bows (Range 12/24/48, Damage 
2d6). 

Special Abilities: 
® Infravision: Halve penalties for 

Illumination when attacking warm 
targets. 
m Size -1: Goblins stand 3-4’ 

tall. 

Riding horses compromise speed with 
,+ carrying capacity. 

‘+ Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4 (A), 
_~ Spirit d6, Strength d12, Vigor d8 

Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d4, 
Notice d6 

Pace: 12; Parry: 4; Toughness: 8 
Edges: Fleet-Footed. 
Special Abilities: 
m Kick: Str+d4, to the front or rear as desired. 
= Size 2: Typical quarter horse of about 1,000 

Ibs. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



War horses are large beasts trained for 
The kings of the jungle are fierce predators, 

aggression. They are trained to fight with 
particularly in open grassland where their 

both hooves, either to their front or their rear. 
prey cannot seek refuge. 

Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d6, 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d6 (A), Spirit d10, 

Strength d12+2, Vigor d10 
Strength d12, Vigor d8 

Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d8, Notice d6 
Skills: Athletics d10, Fighting d8, Notice d8, 

Pace: 8; Parry: 6; Toughness: 10 
Stealth d10 

Edges: Fleet-Footed. 
Pace: 8; Parry: 6; Toughness: 7 

Special Abilities: 
Edges: Frenzy (Imp) 

m Kick: Str+d4, to the front or rear as desired. 
Special Abilities: 

m Size 3: Warhorses are large creatures bred 
= Bite/Claws: Str+d6. 

for their power and stature. 
= Low Light Vision: Lions ignore penalties 

\ LICH for Dim and Dark Illumination. 
= Pounce: Lions pounce on their prey to best 

Perhaps the most diabolical creature in any bring their mass and claws to bear. If a 
fantasy land is the lich—a necromancer lion can leap at least a few feet (1” on the 
so consumed with the black arts that he tabletop) and makes a Wild Attack, it adds 
eventually becomes undead himself. +4 to its damage instead of +2. 
Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d12+2, = Size 1: Typical males are about 400 pounds. 

Spirit d10, Strength d10, Vigor d10 
Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge d8, 
Fighting d8, Intimidation d12, Notice d10, These stats are for a 12-foot-tall mechanized 
Occult d12+2, Persuasion d8, Spellcast- sentinel, as found in a hard scifi campaign. 
ing d12 This is a light patrol-style platform with 

Pace: 6; Parry: 6; Toughness: 15 (6) reasonable intelligence, a sensor package, and 
Edges: Concentration, Level Headed (Imp), high maneuverability. Larger mechs outfitted 
Wizard for battle have substantially more armor, are 

Gear: Magical armor (+6), other magical items. larger, and have more specialized weaponry. 
Special Abilities: 

Attributes: Agility d4, Smarts d6, Spirit d4, 
m Death Touch: Liches drain the lives of 

Strength d12+4, Vigor d8 
those around them with a touch. Instead 

Skills: Fighting d6, Notice d10, Shooting d8 
of a normal attack, a lich may make a 

Pace: 10; Parry: 5; Toughness: 14 (4) 
Touch Attack (page 108). Every raise on 

Edges: Alertness (Sensors). 
its Fighting roll automatically inflicts one 

Gear: Typically a machine gun or 
Wound to its target. 

flamethrower. 
um Spells: Liches have 50 Power Points and 

Special Abilities: 
know most every spell available. 

= Armor +4 
® Undead: +2 Toughness; +2 to recover from 

= Construct: +2 to recover from being Shaken; 
being Shaken; no additional damage from 

ignores 1 point of Wound penalties; does 
Called Shots; ignores 1 point of Wound 

not breathe or suffer from disease or poison. 
penalties; doesn’t breathe; immune to 

= Fearless: Mechs are immune to Fear and 
disease and poison. 

Intimidation, but may be smart enough to 
® Zombie: Liches are necromancers first and 

react to fear-causing situations aptly. 
foremost. The undead they raise through 

= Night Vision: Sensor packages ignore 
the zombie spell are permanent, and they 

penalties for Illumination. 
may raise skeletons just like zombies as they 

=u Size 4 (Large): The mech stands 15’ tall. 
choose. Some liches have built up entire 
armies of the undead at their disposal. 

AHVYILS3d 



MINOTAUR Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit dé, 
Strength d12+2, Vigor d12 

Minotaurs stand over seven feet tall and have Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge dé, 
massive, bull-like heads and horns. In many Fighting d8, Intimidation d8, Notice d4, 
fantasy worlds, they are used as guardians of Persuasion d4 
labyrinths. In others, they are simply another Pace: 7; Parry: 6; Toughness: 11 (1) 
race of creatures occupying a fantastically Edges: Brute, Sweep 
savage land. In all cases, they are fierce Gear: Thick hides (+1), massive club (Str+d8). 
beasts eager for battle and the taste of their Special Abilities: 
opponents’ flesh. = Resilient: Ogres can take one Wound 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts dé, Spirit d8, before they're Incapacitated. 

Strength d12+3, Vigor d12 = Size 2: Most ogres are over 8' tall with pot- 
Skills: Athletics d8, Common Knowledge dé, bellies and massive arms and legs. 
Fighting d10, Intimidation d12, Notice d10, 
Persuasion d4, Stealth d8 

Pace: 8; Parry: 7 or 8 (spear); Toughness: 12 (1) Orcs are savage, green-skinned humanoids 
Edges: Fleet-Footed with pig-like features, including snouts 
Gear: Leather armor (+1), spear (Str+d6, and sometimes even tusks. They have foul 
Reach 1, Parry+1). temperaments and rarely take prisoners. 

Special Abilities: 
Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit de, 

= Horns: Str+d4. 
Strength d8, Vigor d§ 

m Resilient: Minotaurs can take one Wound 
Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge dé, 

before they're Incapacitated. 
Fighting dé, Intimidation d8, Notice d6, 

m Size 3: Minotaurs stand over 7’ tall and 
Persuasion d4, Shooting d6, Stealth d6 

have the mass of bulls. 
Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 8 (1) 
Edges: Brute. 
Gear: Leather armor (+1), scimitar (Str+d8). 

Mules are a cross between a donkey and a Special Abilities: 
horse, and are usually used to haul heavy ® Infravision: Halve penalties for Illumin- 
goods or pull wagons. ation when attacking warm targets. 
Like any good pet, the GM should give u Size 1: Orcs are slightly larger than humans. 

the mule a little personality. The expression 
“stubborn as a mule” certainly comes to mind. W@ ORD, CHIEFTAIN 

The leader of a small orc clan is always the 
Attributes: Agility d4, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d6, most deadly brute in the bunch. Orc chieftains 

Strength d8, Vigor d8 generally have a magical item or two in 
Skills: Athletics d4, Notice d4 settings where such things are relatively 
Pace: 6; Parry: 2; Toughness: 8 common (most “swords & sorcery” worlds). 
Edges: — 
Special Abilities: Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts dé, Spirit dé, 

= Kick: Str. Strength d10, Vigor d10 
® Ornery: Mules are contrary creatures. Skills: Athletics d8, Common Knowledge d8, 

Characters must subtract 1 from their Fighting d12, Intimidation d10, Notice d6, 

Riding rolls when riding them. Persuasion d6, Shooting d8, Stealth d6 

m Size 2: Mules are stocky creatures usually Pace: 6; Parry: 8; Toughness: 12 (4) 

weighing under 1000 pounds. Gear: Plate corselet (+4), chain arms and legs 
(+3), great axe (Str+d10). 

Edges: Brute, Sweep 
Special Abilities: 

Ogres are kin to orcs and lesser giants. They 
= Infravision: Halve penalties for Illumin- 

are often taken in by orc clans, who respect 
ation when attacking warm targets. 

the dumb brutes for their savagery and 
® Size 1: Orcs are slightly larger than humans. 

strength. Orcs often pit their “pet” ogres in 
savage combats against their rivals’. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



RAPTOR (BIRDS OF PREY) SKELETON 
Eagles, hawks, and similar large birds of prey The skin has already rotted from these 
are collectively termed “raptors” (not to be risen dead, leaving them slightly quicker 
confused with the dinosaur variety). than their flesh-laden zombie counterparts. 

Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d6, They are often found swarming in vile 
necromancers’ legions. 

Strength d4-2, Vigor d6 
Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d6, Notice d10, Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4, Spirit d4, 

Stealth d8 Strength d6, Vigor d6 
Pace: 3; Parry: 5; Toughness: 2 Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d6, Intimida- 
Edges: — tion d6, Notice d4, Shooting d6 
Special Abilities: Pace: 7; Parry: 5; Toughness: 7 
= Bite/Claws: Str+d4. Edges: — 
= Flight: Raptors fly at a Pace of 48". Gear: Varies. 
u Size -3 (Very Small): Raptors are light- Special Abilities: 
weight and about two feet tall. mu Claws: Str+d4. 

These statistics cover bull sharks and 
white tips. 

Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d6, 
Strength d8 (d10 for bull shark), Vigor d8 

Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d8, Notice d12, 
Stealth d8 

Pace: —; Parry: 6; Toughness: 7 
Edges: — 
Special Abilities: 
® Aquatic: Pace 10. 
= Bite: Str+d6. 
u Size 1: Sharks up to 500 pounds. 

SHARK, GREAT WHITE 
These statistics cover great whites, 18 to 25 
feet long. 

Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d8, 
Strength d12+4, Vigor d12 =

Skills: Athletics d8, Fighting d10, Notice d12, 5 0  
Stealth d12 = 

Pace: —; Parry: 7; Toughness: 12 
Edges: — B 
Special Abilities: = 
® Aquatic: Pace 10. 
= Bite: Str+d8. 
® Hardy: The creature does not suffer a 
Wound from being Shaken twice. 

m Size 4 (Large): Great whites can 
grow up to 25’ in length. 



® Fearless: Skeletons are immune to Fear and Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit dé, 
Intimidation. Strength d4-2, Vigor d6 

[72] ® Undead: +2 Toughness; +2 to recover from Skills: Athletics d6, Fighting d8, Notice d12, 
a 
1 being Shaken; no additional damage from Stealth d8 
[4 Called Shots; ignores 1 point of Wound Pace: 4; Parry: 6; Toughness: 2 
(=) penalties; doesn’t breathe; immune to Edges: Quick 
= disease and poison. Special Abilities: 
[#] = Bite: Str+2. 

& ® Poison: The GM chooses what kind of 

= Snakes in the real world are rarely aggressive poison the viper injects (see Poison, page 

0 unless cornered or frightened. They're a 128). 
I staple of adventure fiction, however, so here ® Size -3 (Very Small): Most venomous 
are two of the most common. snakes are 4-6’ in length, but only a few 

inches thick. 
GONSTRIGTORS 
Pythons, boa constrictors, and other snakes 
over 15’ long are rarely deadly to man in the Goons, grunts, soldiers, or others with 
real world because they aren't particularly basic training serve as foot soldiers for 
aggressive. In games, however, such more powerful characters. They should 
snakes might be provoked, drugged, or just be customized and outfitted to fit their 
plain mean. particular role. 

Attributes: Agility d4, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit d8, Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit dé, 
Strength dé, Vigor d6 Strength d6, Vigor d6 

Skills: Athletics dé, Fighting d6, Notice d10, Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge dé, 

Stealth d6 Fighting d6, Intimidation d6, Notice dé, 

Pace: 4; Parry: 5; Toughness: 5 Persuasion d6, Shooting d6, Stealth d4 

Edges: — Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 5 
Special Abilities: Hindrances: — 
= Bite: Str. Edges: Soldier 
u Constrict+:2 to Athletics and Strength rolls 
made to grapple. SPIDER, GIANT 

Giant spiders are about the size of large dogs 
and live in nests of 1d6 +2 arachnids. They 

Here are the stats for Taipans (Australian frequently go hunting in packs when prey is 
brown snakes), cobras, and similar medium- scarce in their home lair. 
sized snakes with extremely deadly poison. 

Their dens are littered with the bones and 
treasures of their victims, often providing 
ripe pickings for those brave enough to 
venture within. 

Attributes: Agility d10, Smarts d4 (A), Spirit 
d6, Strength d10, Vigor d6 
Skills: Athletics d10, Fighting d8, 
Intimidation d10, Notice d8, Shoot- 

ing d10, Stealth d10 
Pace: 8; Parry: 6; Toughness: 4 
Edges: — 
Special Abilities: 
u Bite: Str+d4. 
= Poison (-4): Usually Mild 
or Lethal. See page 128. 
= Size 1: These spiders are 

dog-sized. 



= Wall Walker: The creatures move at their Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d4, Spirit d6, 
full Pace on walls and ceilings! Creepy! Strength d12+2, Vigor d10 

= Webbing: The spiders can cast webs from Skills: Athletics d6, Common Knowledge d8, 
their thorax that are the size of Small Blast Fighting d8, Intimidation d10, Notice d6, 
Templates. This is a Shooting roll with Stealth d4 
a Range of 6". A hit means the victim is Pace: 7; Parry: 6; Toughness: 9 (1) 
Entangled, or Bound with a raise (see Gear: Spiked club (Str+d8). 
Bound & Entangled, page 98). Edges: Brute, Sweep (Imp) 

Special Abilities: 
= Armor +1: Rubbery hide. 

Sometimes the most deadly foes come in the = Bite/Claws: Str+d4. 
smallest packages. The swarm described here = Fast Regeneration: Trolls may attempt a 
can be of most anything — from biting ants natural healing roll every round, even if 
to stinging wasps to filthy rats. They cover Incapacitated, unless their Wounds were 
an area equal to a Large, Medium, or Small caused by fire or flame or theyre put to the 
Blast Template and attack everyone within it torch afterward. 

every round. When a swarm is Incapacitated = Resilient: Trolls can take one Wound before 
it’s effectively dispersed. theyre Incapacitated. 

= Size 1: Trolls are tall, lanky creatures over 
Attributes: Agility d10, Smarts d4 (A), 8' tall. 

Spirit d12, Strength d8, Vigor d10 
Skills: Notice d6 W VAMPIRE 
Pace: 10; Parry: 4; Toughness: 7 

Blood-drinkers of lore are common in many 
Edges: — 

fantasy games. This is a relatively young 
Special Abilities: 

vampire minion. For weaker vampires, ignore 
u Bite or Sting: Swarms inflict hundreds 

the Invulnerability Special Ability. 
of tiny bites every round to their victims, 
hitting automatically and causing 2d4 Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d8, Spirit d8, 
damage to everyone in the template. Strength d12+1, Vigor d10 
Damage is applied to the least armored Skills: Athletics d8, Common Knowledge d8, 
location (victims in completely sealed suits Fighting d8, Intimidation d8, Notice d6, 
are immune). Persuasion d8, Shooting dé, Stealth d10 

® Split: Some swarms split into two smaller Pace: 6; Parry: 6; Toughness: 9 
swarms when Wounded (GM's call). Edges: Frenzy, Level Headed 
Reduce the Blast Template one size after a Special Abilities: 
Wound; Small swarms are destroyed. = Bite/Claws: Str+d4. 

® Swarm: Parry +2. Because the swarm ® Invulnerability: Vampires can only be 
is composed of scores, hundreds, or slain by sunlight or a stake through the 
thousands of creatures, cutting and piercing heart (see those Weaknesses, below). They 
weapons do no real damage. Area effect may be Shaken by other attacks, but never 
weapons work normally, and a character Wounded. 
can stomp to inflict his damage in Strength ® Sire: Anyone slain by a vampire has a 50% 
each round. Some swarms (bees, hornets, chance of rising as a vampire in 1d4 days. 
birds) may be foiled by total immersion in = Undead: +2 Toughness; +2 to recover from 
water. being Shaken; no additional damage from 

Called Shots; ignores 1 point of Wound 

TROLL penalties; doesn’t breathe; immune to 

Trolls in myths and legends are horrid, flesh- disease and poison. 
eating creatures who live in deep woods, = Weakness (Holy Symbol): A character with 
beneath bridges, or in hidden mountain a holy symbol may keep a vampire at bay 
caves. In modern games and fiction, trolls by displaying a holy symbol. A vampire 
are monsters with the ability to regenerate who wants to directly attack the victim 
damage other than that caused by fire. These must beat her in an opposed Spirit roll. 
statistics reflect both backgrounds. 

AHVILS3d 



um Weakness (Holy Water): A vampire = Mist: Ancient vampires have the ability 
sprinkled with holy water is Fatigued. If to turn into mist. Doing so (or returning 
immersed, he combusts as if it were direct to human form) requires an action and a 
sunlight (see below). Smarts roll at -2. 

® Weakness (Invitation Only): Vampires can- = Sire: Anyone slain by a vampire has a 50% 
not enter a private dwelling without being chance of rising as a vampire in 1d4 days. 
invited. They may enter public domains as = Undead: +2 Toughness; +2 to recover from 
they please. being Shaken; no additional damage from 

= Weakness (Stake Through the Heart): Called Shots; ignores 1 point of Wound 
A vampire hit with a Called Shot to the penalties; doesn’t breathe; immune to 
heart (—4) must make a Vigor roll versus disease and poison. 
the damage. If successful, it takes damage = Weakness (Holy Symbol): A character 
normally. If it fails, it disintegrates to dust. may keep a vampire at bay by displaying 

® Weakness (Sunlight): Vampires burn in a holy symbol. A vampire who wants to 
sunlight. They take 2d4 damage per round directly attack the victim must beat her in 
until they are ash. Armor protects normally. an opposed Spirit roll. 

= Weakness (Holy Water): A vampire 
W ANGIENT VAMPIRE sprinkled with holy water is Fatigued. If 
These statistics are for a vampire somewhat immersed, he combusts as if it were direct 
below the legendary Dracula, but far above sunlight (see below). 
those bloodsuckers fresh from the grave. The = Weakness (Invitation Only): Vampires 
abilities listed here are standard — the GM cannot enter a private dwelling without 
may want to add other Edges as befit the being invited. They may enter public 
vampire’s previous lifestyle. domains as they please. 
Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d10, Spirit d10, ® Weakness (Stake Through the Heart): A 

Strength d12+3, Vigor d12 vampire hit with a Called Shot to the heart 

Skills: Athletics d8, Common Knowledge d10, (-4) must make a Vigor roll versus the 
Fighting d10, Intimidation d12, Notice d8, damage total. If successful, it takes damage 

Persuasion d12, Shooting d8, Stealth d10 normally. If it fails, it disintegrates to dust. 
Pace: 6; Parry: 7; Toughness: 10 = Weakness (Sunlight): Vampires burn in 
Edges: Frenzy (Imp), Level Headed sunlight. They take 2d4 damage per round 
Special Abilities: until they are ash. Armor protects normally. 
= Bite/Claws: Str+d4. 
® Change Form: As an action, a vampire can WEREWOLF 
change into a wolf or bat with a Smarts roll When a full moon emerges, humans infected 
at —2. Changing back into humanoid form with lycanthropy lose control and become 
requires a Smarts roll. snarling creatures bent on murder. Some 

® Charm: Vampires can use the puppet power embrace their cursed state and revel in the 
on those attracted to them (GM's call) using destruction they cause. 
their Smarts as their arcane skill. They can Customize the Special Abilities that 
cast and maintain the power indefinitely, make sense for your particular flesh-ripper. 
but may only affect one target at a time. Older or “pure-blood” lycanthropes may 

u Children of the Night: Ancient vampires be Invulnerable to all but silver or magic, 
have the ability to summon and control for example. 
wolves or rats. This requires an action and 
a Smarts roll at -2. If successful, 1d6 wolves Attributes: Agility d8, Smarts d6, Spirit d6, 

or 1d6 swarms of rats (see Swarm on page Strength d12+2, Vigor d10 
189) come from the surrounding wilds in Skills: Athletics d8, Common Knowl- 

1d6+2 rounds. edge d8, Fighting d12+2, Intimidation d10, 
® Invulnerability: Vampires can only be slain Notice d12, Stealth d10, Survival d10 

by sunlight or a stake through the heart (see Pace: 8; Parry: 9; Toughness: 8 

those Weaknesses, below). They may be Edges: — 
Shaken by other attacks, butnever Wounded. Special Abilities: 

m Bite/Claws: Str+d8. 

190 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



= Fast Regeneration: Werewolvmeasy  attempt 
a natural healing roll every round unless the 
Wounds were caused by silvered objects. These walking dead are typical groaning 
Fear (-2): Werewolves chill the blood of all fiends looking for fresh meat. 
who see them. Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts dd, Spirit d4, 

u Infection: Anyone slain by a werewolf Strength d6, Vigor dé 
has a 50% chance of rising as a werewolf Skills: Athletics d4, Fighting d6, Intimida- 
themselves. The character involuntarily tion d6, Notice d4, Shooting d6 
transforms every full moon. He gains Pace: 4; Parry: 5; Toughness: 7 
control of his lycanthropy only after 1d6 Edges: — 
years as a werewolf. Special Abilities: 

® Infravision: Halve penalties for Illumination = Bite/Claws: Str. 
when attacking warm targets. u Fearless: Zombies are immune to Fear and 

= Size 1: Werewolves are stout creatures. Intimidation. 
® Undead: +2 Toughness; +2 to recover from 
being Shaken; no additional damage from 
Called Shots; ignores 1 point of Wound 
penalties; doesn’t breathe; immune to 
disease and poison. 

m Weakness (Head): Called Shots to a 
zombie’s head do the usual +4 damage. 

w 
Im 

=






GHAPTER SEVEN 

GAME MASTERING 

A group of heroes embarks upon an epic Everything else in this book, from all 
quest. Terrible monsters and bitter rivals those Chase maneuvers to Interludes and 
oppose them. The elements are against them. Situational Rules can be ignored until you 
Mysteries must be solved, artifacts found, need them. 
innocents saved. A great way to learn the core rules is to run 

It's your privilege as Game Master to bring a simple fight on your own first. Put a Wild 
all these fantastic elements to life, challenging Card fighter and three skeletons on the table 
your players with adventure beyond their in front of you and have at it. Your only goal 
wildest imaginations and providing a is to get a feel for rolling the dice, figuring 
framework to find out if they succeed or fail totals from Aces and modifiers, rolling and 
in their ultimate goal. applying damage, and Soaking Wounds. 
This is the fun of being a Game Master— Once you've got the hang of that, you're 

creating, managing, and presenting an entire ready to run your first game. Don’t worry 
world of excitement and adventure to your if you and your friends have to look a few 
friends and peers. It can be one of the most things up the first time. And don’t be afraid 
satisfying entertainment experiences in not to look things up and just wing it if you're 
existence and Savage Worlds is designed to in the middle of a good story and want to 
help you ruthlessly wring every tension-filled move on. The vast majority of the experience 
moment and gut-busting laugh from it. is just you and your friends talking and 
So now you've read the rules and probably making some skill rolls. All those extra rules 

have more ideas for anew campaign than you are there when you want or need them to help 
know what to do with, but before you dive make a decision. 

in, let's take a moment to talk about the art 
of being a good Game Master, leading your 
group, creating worlds, and putting together You might think the first step in starting a 
memorable and exciting adventures. new game is finding a group of people to 

play with. That is important, but don’t do that 
yet. First get yourself excited. Figure out what 

Don’t be intimidated by all the rules in you want to run and start jotting down ideas. 
Savage Worlds. They're meant to handle Do that and you'll likely get all your friends 
most everything under the sun, but all you excited as well. 
need to start is how to resolve Trait rolls and Once you've figured out what kind of 
basic combat. setting you want to run, ask yourself what 

types of characters your friends might play. 



What might a typical adventure be like? Write Don’t rule out playing on weeknights. 
down what makes your game cool, who the Friday and Saturday are great if you're single 

wn bad guys are, what kinds of magic or other or in college but difficult for players who 
a 
=| supernatural aspects are present, and what need to focus the weekends on their families. 
[= your basic storyline is. If you have these If you start at 6 p.m., your players have time 
=] elements, you likhaveelnouygh  information to get off work, grab some food (or share the 

to get your friends excited and ready to play. traditional pizza with the group!), and get 
Rd deep into the game by 7 or so. 
ao GAME NIGHTS Most sessions should wrap things up by 11 

Now it’s time to recruit some players. You p.m. or so. Most people tend to get a little tired 
wi have a great campaign idea and enough by then and you don’t want game night to be 

information about it to explain it to your a stressful experience. Talk it over with your 
friends. The next step is to find out who friends and see what works for them. Setting 
wants to play and when they can get together. some basic rules helps everyone schedule 

It might be best to tell everyone when you'd their time and show up week after week. 
like to run your game. You're the one person You might want to end each game session 
who must be there every session so the timing with a cliffhanger, question, or quest. Hearing 
needs to work for you. You can alter it based your players talk about what's going to 
on your friends’ schedules, of course, but if happen next is one of the best rewards you 
you just ask when everyone is free you're can hope for when running a game! 
going to spend a lot of time trying to manage 
a lot of often vague or conflicting preferences. GHARAGTER TYPES 
Most groups meet once a week, or every Once you have a game night and a few 

other week, depending on how busy friends set to attend, give them some basic 
everyone is. More important is that once you information on the setting and find out what 
set a regular date you try and stick to it. If you kind of characters they want to play. 
rely on a fluctuating schedule people tend to You don’t need everyone to make characters 
forget or schedule conflicting events. People at this po—ichanracter creation in Savage 
have busy lives, and as much as everyone Worlds is fast enough they can do it at your 
involved might want to play, they still have first session if you want. But if some of your 
tostudy for classes, take care of their children, friends have neat ideas as to their background 
work, manage personal events, and otherwise or basic type (fighter, investigator, etc.), 
live their lives. If you have a set night every you can start doing more detail work on 
week, it’s much easier for your friends to your story. 
schedule most of their activities around it. It 

If you're going to run Deadlands, for 
also helps you know when you have to be 

example, and all your friends make combat 
ready to run. 



types you know they're looking for a high- companions. This is also a great way to kick 
action game. You can still mix in lots of other off a convention game where your group only 
elements — exploration, investigation, horror, has a few hours to play. 
deep roleplaying — but every now and then 
set up a big bloody shootout as well. STAYING TOGETHER 

After the first adventure, the players may 

GETTING THE PARTY TOGETHER wonder why their characters stay together. 
That's easy if they're employed by a common 

Now that you have the players together, you benefactor, or if similar groups are common 
have to figure out why their characters are to the setting (adventuring crews, military 
together. There are two common ways to teams, and so on). 
handle this. 

Staying together might be more difficult 
if the campaign goal isn't very clear though, 
or if some of the characters don't get along 

One way to build a party is for a nonplayer 
that well. How to fix this depends a lot on the 

character to offer a reward for adventurers to 
type of game you're running. If there's a clear, 

complete some task. Perhaps they answer a 
overall objective or over-arching storyline, the 

want ad, are hired in a smoky tavern, or are 
party might stay together to defeat the greater 

called on by connections or friends. Thrown 
evil, even if they aren't the best of friends. 

together by fate and circumstance, the heroes 
must then learn to work as a team. If the campaign goal is more ambiguous, 

the best answer may be not to force the heroes 
There's a problem that sometimes arises 

to stay together. Consider a modern horror 
from this approach. Say you're running 

game. The players are thrust together in a 
a fantasy campaign and the mission is to 

haunted mansion for a weekend. Terrible 
deliver a message to a distant city. But one of 

things occur, but eventually at least some of 
the characters in your group is a witch hunter. 

the investigators survive and stagger back 
His player is all excited about making such a 

into daylight. Why would they then go out 
unique character, but you need him (and the 

hunting vampires or searching for zombies 
others) to be a courier for now and accept the 

the following week just because they had one 
assignment to kick off your campaign. 

incredible encounter together? 
Fortunately, there's an easy fix: let the 

Maybe they don’t. Maybe they all go 
player figure it out. Be honest and tell him this 

home and try to forget what happened just 
is what you need to get things started. Maybe 

like normal folks. Let a few days or weeks 
the witch hunter is simply between jobs. Or 

pass where nothing happens (narratively, of 
maybe he’s working under cover to root out 

course). Later on, one of the characters gets 
some evil sorceress, or needs to earn gold to 

involved in another creepy encounter. Now 
buy better arms and equipment for his true 

he knows a few others who might believe his 
quest. Or maybe the employer or the recipient 

wild tale so he calls for help. 
is an old friend (or enemy). 

This approach not only helps get things 0) 
moving but empowers the player and = 

So what happens if your group doesn’t get 
might give your campaign a new and along? That depends on whether it's the 2 

Im 
interesting subplot! players or the characters who are arguing. 2 

We won't give you advice on how to handle 
conflicts with your friends. You know them & 

You can also start a campaign with all the i 
best and will have to figure out if there are Im 

characters already knowing each other. This 
certain individuals who just don’t fit in this 

works great for getting the game moving, = 
campaign. Remember though that friends are 2 

and is very appropriate for certain campaign 
more important than games— even this one. 9] 

types. In Weird Wars settings, for example, 
If you and the rest of the group can’t talk out 

the player characters have often served 
your differences, find something else to do 

together for weeks, months, or even years. 
for a while that doesn’t cause such friction. 

They know the basic faults and vices of their 



Maybe you can come back to the game once HAGK AND SLASH 
you've worked things out. A hack and slash game features lots of combat. 

Friction between characters, on the other With Savage Worlds, you can do more than pit 
hand, is not only fine, it’s actually encouraged your five player characters against a couple of 
to some degree. Any interesting group of orcs and an ogre. You can throw a whole horde 
personalities squabble and argue on occasion. at your heroes and give them a few staunch 
As long as this is done in character it adds allies or henchmen to help as well! 
to the roleplaying experience and the depth The best part is that players who just want 
of your campaign. Quiet fights between the to wade into the forces of darkness with 
heroes can often take on a life of their own, two blades slashing can do that too. More 
encouraging players to take you, the Game tactically-minded players can load up on 
Master, aside or write you private notes about Leadership Edges and direct the actions of 
actions their heroes perform away from the hirelings and allies. 
prying eyes of others. Intrigue and betrayal 

Players who like to think on their feet can 
are integral to good dramatic stories. Just 

use the Support and Test rules to defeat foes 
make sure the group talks things out and 

without ever making a single attack! 
keeps the conflict to their characters; not 
real life. Some disparage hack and slash campaigns 

these days, but there's nothing wrong with 

GAMPAIGN TYPES enjoying a good tactical combat either — and 
there can be epic roleplaying even in the 

Different groups like different types of games. middle of massive fights. 
Some like lots of combat, others want to 
explore the world, and some are into deep EXPLORATION 
roleplaying and storytelling. Most people like Wandering through lost cities, finding 
a good mix. Here are some pointers on each. forgotten treasures, or reclaiming fallen 

civilizations is exciting for explorer-types. 



The Great Unknown lurks behind every pile talk about. If the majority of your adventure 
of toppled columns, and incredible treasures is a bunch of people standing in a room, 
await those brave enough to take them from you're likely in for a slow night. If they're in 
their mysterious guardians. a room trying to find out which one of them 
The trouble with exploration games is a murderer, the action will likely be quite 

is that they're often difficult for you, the exciting. And if the lights occasionally go 
Game Master, to create. All those incredible out and another victim turns up dead, the 
surprises, fearsome beasts, and awesome interaction between characters can easily get 
treasures have to be created, of course. as exciting as the most knock-down, drag-out 
Fortunately, Savage Worlds makes it easy to dungeon crawl. 
quickly create just about any creature, magic 
item, or other surprise you can dream up. 
One important tip here. The players don’t Most every game has an element of horror 

have access to your creatures’ statistics unless to it. New Game Masters often ask how to 
you show them. If you describe mysterious handle horror in their games. They have 
creatures of different shapes and sizes, they visions in their heads of their friends sitting 
won't know they're all basically the same stats around shivering in utter terror as gruesome 
with just cosmetic or descriptive differences. fiends stalk their underpowered investigators. 

It's hard to describe wonders in a game and In our experience, that’s not very likely. 
keep them exciting. Ancient vases, strange There may certainly be moments like that, but 
pictograms, and archaeological sites set a more often your group will be sitting around 
great tone for exploration-style games but eating nachos and making bad jokes to each 
unless they convey meaning or occasionally other. The worst thing you can do is try and 
provide some sort of game effect players stop them. Remember they're there to have a 
can get bored quickly. It's hard for most to good time and socialize while exercising their 
stay excited about detailed descriptions of own imaginations. Let them enjoy themselves 
Etruscan urns. Give them an occasional urn and don’t try to be overly oppressive with the 
with a hidden bag of gold coins, or better yet spooky stuff. 
an ancient wine that miraculously relieves 

When the time comes and the weirdness 
Fatigue, and they'll be much more interested 

begins, subtly change the tone a bit. Smile 
in sifting through the ruins. 

and dim the lights, then turn on some creepy 

ROLEPLAYING music —just loud enough for them to hear 
it without being intrusive. If what you're 

Perhaps the trickiest type of campaign to run 
running is genuinely creepy, your group will 

is one that involves deep roleplaying. It's easy 
be relaxed and willing to go with the flow and 

to handle rules-wise — there likely won't be 
let the heebie-jeebies take over. Try and force 

much die rolling. The tricky part is knowing 
them and it will almost certainly backfire. 

when to push the team into a new situation 
or event and when to just let them talk to each Whatever you do, when the group finally 
other or your nonplayer characters. encounters some horrid monster, make sure 0) 

to describe it rather than refer to it by name. = 
Being able to create characters and creatures 

A “large, lanky, green-skinned creature with 2 
on the fly helps tremendously here. You can Im 

drool dripping from its fangs and beady black 
jot down a few notes about a character’s 

eyes” is much more frightening than “a troll.” 2 
most important Edges, Hindrances, or skills 
and move on. That way you can concentrate & 

= 

on giving your Extras more personality and Remove. ThH zO oGW NGf PoRnO P Im 
worry less about calculating their Parry or = 
Toughness — atleast until they get into a fight! cPIDERS AT GA gg 2 

UME 9] 
Another thing to be careful about when 

running a game that’s heavy on roleplaying s AREA The 6M 
is making sure there are at least a few events 
scheduled to give the group something to 



If so, you can then try one of our more 

RUNNING THE GAME involved settings, like Deadlands, Necessary 
[72] 
Mm Re Pad Sm f Evil, Rippers, one of our excellent licensees’ 

a 
| worlds, or even one of your own creation. You 

[4 Savage Worlds has been designed from the can also convert your favorite game world 
o ground up to make the job of the Game into the Savage Worlds rules. 
= Master as easy as possible. The designers 
[#] | want you to concentrate on making incredible 

& and exciting memories with your friends. We BALANGE 
4 aren’t interested in spending hours before Some games have very strict rules for how 

the game creating statistics for Karlos the to balance encounters so that every fight is 
0 Innkeeper. “fair.” The battle might be a tough one, but it’s 

That means you can concentrate on creating still expected the heroes can win if they play 
intricate plots, tricky puzzles, and interesting smart and have decent luck. 
characters. You don’t have to do complex In Savage Worlds, most set piece encounters 
math to make your nonplayer characters and should be reasonably balanced for the 
monsters, and you certainly don’t need to expected power level of the group, but this 
spend more than a minute or two to make up isn't always the case. Sometimes it’s just 
bandits for a quick ambush. as interesting for the players to evaluate a 
Your job is kept easy during the game as situation and realize they probably can’t 

well since there's very little bookkeeping. You win — at least not by charging in guns blazing. 
might have to track a few Wild Card villains’ This is desirable on occasion as it encourages 
Wounds, but other than that, the foes are up the group to think, talk, plan, and come up 
and acting normally, Shaken, or removed with clever solutions to the most challenging 
from play. You can focus on describing the situations. 

action instead of trying to record “2 hit points Game Masters should never be afraid to 
of damage on the skeleton figure with the let the opposition flex their muscles. These 
chipped paint on his sword.” are savage worlds, after all, and triumphing 
Take advantage of these things to give against these foes should be a major 

yourself a break and run a game like you accomplishment — not a given. 
never have before. If you want to spend a lot That brings us to failure. If a monster or 
of time on your campaign, make some cool villain defeats the party, take a moment 
props, work on your plots and subplots, and to talk to the group and remind them that 
give your monsters a few memorable Special the greatest heroes often experience such 
Abilities (and maybe even playtest them all setbacks. How they pick themselves up and 
by yourself to make sure they work how carry on after is what truly defines them. 
you want). Failure is also often more interesting than 

success. Say a young lord challenges a 
INTRODUGING NEW PLAYERS barbarian to a one-on-one fight to bring peace 

to their lands. The young lord loses and the 
Getting your friends to try a new game, 

player characters assigned to protect him 
especially if theyre used to one system and 

decide to violate the rules of the truce. They 
don’t like to try many others, can be pretty 

step in and kill the barbarian champion! The 
difficult. We recommend printing the free 

noble is now disgraced but must somehow 
Test Drive rules from our website and giving 

continue to lead those who sacrificed their 
them to each of your friends. This will show 

own honor to save him. 
them what Savage Worlds is all about and 
encourage them to try it at least once. If you GRAFTING A CHALLENGE 
run one of the free adventures from our site 

Once you've played Savage Worlds for a while 
with pregenerated characters from one of our 

you should have a good feel for how many 
settings it should be very easy for everyone to 

foes to throw at your adventurers. Here's 
jump in, play a short session, and figure out if 

some general advice, but make sure to think 
it's for them. We hope it is of course. 

about additional advantages either side 

198 



4b f 

might have (traps, support, powerful magic 
items, or favorable terrain). 

* A Novice Wild Card hero with at least some In general, player characters at the start 
combat ability should be able to take on of Savage Worlds campaigns are of Novice 
three average foes (those with mostly dés in Rank. They have a little training and talent 
every thing and normal arms and armor), or but haven't had many adventures on 
two foes with better skills, arms, or armor. their own yet. 

* As the party's Rank increases, the number This bears repeating: Novice characters are 
or quality of foes should increase as well. “novices.” They have a little more skill and 

* A good fight for a party of heroes is two ability than most but are only just beginning 
Extras per hero plus an enemy Wild Card their careers. They aren't expected to take on 
leader with roughly the same number of dragons or arch villains — they're expected 
combat Edges (or other advantages). to earn their way to those penultimate 
Experiment with these compositions until confrontations. 

you have a feel for the game. Then you can Of course, that’s a typical campaign. You 
try more powerful opponents or increased may also want to start with more experienced 
numbers of less powerful foes. characters. That's encouraged for really 

If a fight is going poorly, you don’t have to difficult worlds or for shorter campaigns 
“fudge” the rivals’ dice rolls or put them down where the heroes need to get to the heart of 0) 
when the situation didn’t really deserve the action a little quicker. A commando raid Fd 
it. That feels cheap and undeserved to the in Weird War Two, an assault on a lich’s lair, or 2 

Im 
players. Instead, reward the heroes with super spies infiltrating a diabolical villain’s 
Bennies when you have the chance. That will base are not adventures for the untrained. 2 
help them succeed when they need to and If you do start with experienced heroes, & 
Soak Wounds. | 

make sure players create their characters as Im 
But also...don’t be afraid to let them Novices and then Advance them normally. = 

fail. It doesn’t have to be a TPK (Total Party That ensures Edges, ability points, and 2 
Kill). Maybe they wake up in their enemy’s powers are purchased correctly so that 9] 
dungeons or are bound and on a train to some characters retain the balance built into each 
distant locale. Both are just excuses for new of those systems. 
adventures and obstacles to overcome — not 
the end of the campaign. 



Start experienced characters as Seasoned, Then they have to rely on Jokers or those 
or very rarely, Veterans, when first trying really big moments for rewa— rjumdpisng 
this out. Once you have a good feel for it, you on the dragon's back, leaping through a 
can go as high as you want. A tournament of stained glass window, a particularly good 
Legendary characters is an amazing spectacle! Taunt against the villain, and so on. 

INTERPRET THE DIE ROLLS 
Bennies are the true economy of Savage Worlds. Savage Worlds frequently features wild and 
They allow you to reward creative players unpredictable die rolls. When this happens, 
for their actions, entertaining the group, and go with it! If a hero has to jump from a 
playing in character. wrecked car as it careens out of control and 
New Savage Worlds Game Masters often makes an amazing Athletics roll, describe 

forget to award them or are afraid Bennies how he leaps into the air, tucks and rolls on 
will make things too easy for the party. the ground, and comes up on his feet with 
They won't. When players have lots of perfect balance. Similarly, don’t be afraid to 
Bennies, they tend to spend them on what's throw some bad luck at him when he gets 
important to their character rather than just a really poor roll. Maybe while using the 
hoarding them to stay alive. If Bennies are Chase rules a player skis down a mountain 
scarce, they'll definitely do the latter, and, the to escape a rampaging yeti and rolls snake 
game's balance is built around their constant eyes! Describe how he tumbles, rolling and 
flow. Remember that the rerolls they grant tumbling through the cold, wet snow as the 
guarantee nothing. A player might spend five beast bounds after his fallen prey. 
Bennies on a simple Notice roll and still fail. Your players will love the extra 
It’s not likely, but it’s definitely possible. embellishment. They'll feel powerful and 
So when do you award them? Anytime cool when the dice are nice, and danger 

a player does something clever, finds an and excitement when the dice betray them, 

important clue, or roleplays his character, especially if you take a moment to make 
particularly if it involves their Hindrances or the setback interesting. That's what makes 
background. If a Loyal character jeopardizes a Critical Failure on a Fighting attack, for 
his life to save his comrade, he definitely example, go from feeling like a lost turn to a 
deserves a Benny for his efforts. If a Slow hero memorable part of the story. 
tells the others to go on while he stays back to 
fight the pack of wolves at their heels because 
he knows he’s slowing down the rest of the 

A good Game Master must pay attention to 
group, reward him for it! 

the pace of the game. Sometimes your friends 
It also never hurts to reward a player for will want to take their time roleplaying 

a great line, side-splitting in-game joke; or their characters, interacting with the world, 
even better when she pulls off a serious and or even just joking out of character and 
dramatic moment. enjoying the social aspect of the game. If this 
Once a player has been rewarded for goes on too long, however, they may need a 

something, you can stop or slow down little prodding. 
rewarding the same behavior. A running This can be especially true in open 
joke shouldnt grant a Benny every time it's adventures such as a murder mystery that 
mentioned, for example. Risking real danger requires the players to figure out where 
for the Heroic Hindrance, however, should their characters go and what they should do 
almost always result in a reward. (as opposed to a dungeon crawl or similar 
Bennies usually flow at the start of the adventure where they really only need to 

adventure as players roleplay and get used decide if they're pressing forward or not). 
tothe game. They slow down later once those If most or all of the group is roleplaying, 
traits have been rewarded a few times already. smiling, and having a good time — leave them 
By the climax, Bennies might be fairly scarce, alone. Let them set the tempo. If you notice 
both in the players’ stacks and as rewards. 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



some of your players are left out or looking a desperate and that the next die roll better be 
little bored, prod the group to see what they a good one. 
want to next. If they seem lost as to what That's not to say there aren’t times when 
to do next, ask one of the group to recount you want to give a player a moment to think — 
the clues or situation as they understand it. particularly if they have a big plan or need to 
This is often enough to spark an idea or lead look up something really important, like the 
they want to follow up on. You might also details of a power or a special rule. 
introduce new information via a call or visit 

You might also occasionally give the entire 
from a nonplayer character. 

group a moment. If a terrible foe shows 
Finally, don’t be afraid to contrive an up after a few rounds of combat, a quick 

encounter that gives the group a new path to bathroom break gives everyone a moment 
follow. Maybe the team is attacked by their to soak in the fact that things just got more 
rivals and in the aftermath are able to gather challenging. 
anew clue from the survivors. 

Feel the moment and play up the drama 

GOMBAT PAGING befitting your scenario, the environment, 
and the party's mood, and let them plan 

Just as important as keeping the plot moving 
and strategize a bit if it makes sense or will 

forward is making sure combats are fast and 
benefit the game. 

furious. As you count down the Action Cards, 
make each player tell you what his character 
is doing fairly quickly. If he needs a moment, 
put his character on Hold and move on to the o 
next player. | ZEAD ONCE THAT Exe As = 

If you feel the scene should be particularly 2 
CAN USUALLY ONL TAKE ONE m 

dramatic and a player doesn’t announce 
his character's intentions quickly enough, WouND $0 THEY'RE ‘uF; DOL, 2 
start counting down... “What do you do? 5, or-0FF THE TABLE! THAT & 
4, 3...!” That will get all the players” blood KEEPS THINGS FAST, Furzious, oi 

Im 
pumping and reinforce the notion that their AND FUN AND 16 KINDA = 
characters are in a dangerous situation that THE CORE OF Hol COMBAT Z 
requires quick decisions and big heroics. 

Works FOZ THE BADDIES.” 
a 

Most of the time, rush things along. Make 
them feel the urgency of combat. Make them ~The 6M 
a little nervous. Make them realize things are 



EXTRAS Though it’s rarely written, most games 
The backbone of any good game is the world assume the Game Master controls the 
that surrounds the player characters, and nonplayer characters, both when they're 
nonplayer characters are a big part of that. being talked to and when they fight alongside 
This section shows you how to breathe life the player characters in combat. The latteris a 
into the supporting cast of your world. burden for the GM, who often simply forgets 

about the additional characters during a fight, 
GREATING EXTRAS or shoves them off to the side and narratively 
Consider this Game Master's Rule #1 when it describes what happens to them. This goes 
comes to Extras: Don’t “build” them! for hirelings as well as animal companions, 
Don’t create your Extras with the character sidekicks, or love interests. The simple fact is 

creation rules. Just give them what you think that in most games, allies are a cumbersome 
they ought to have in their various skills and complication. 

attributes and move on. The game is supposed Savage Worlds takes a very different approach 
to be easy for you to set up, run, and play. —we turn control of allies over to the player 
Don’t sit around adding up skill points for characters. The GM acts out these allies when 
Extras when you could be designing fiendish they're spoken to, of course, but should very 
traps and thinking up nasty Special Abilities rarely, if ever, take them over in combat. 
for your monsters! If you allow your heroes to have allies, you 

can include all the minions your villains 
PERSONALITY should have as well. Picture an ancient lich 
Far more important than most nonplayer inhis unholy tomb. Would he be sitting there 
character's statistics are their personalities. alone? No, he'd be surrounded by scores of 
Jot down a note or two about any Extras the ghoulish undead. These lesser minions make 
party is likely to come across so you'll have great complications for your battles and your 
some idea how to run them. Some Game players will have fun bashing through them 
Masters find it useful to identify prominent with the Extras while their heroes battle the 
Extras with actors or characters from film, lich and his named lieutenants. 
television, books, or comics. 

This takes a little getting used to if you've 
Knowing that the Captain of the City been Game Mastering other games for a long 

Guard is “played by Sam Elliot,” for instance, time. We suggest you try it for a bit and see 
gives you a good handle on how to handle how it works out. You can always change if it 
interactions with him. He's likely to be gruff, doesn’t make sense for your group. 
to the point, and have a deep, throaty voice. 
Adding these additional touches to the ARTIFICIAL INFLATION 

characters can really make them stand out When running Savage Worlds, a lot of Game 
and be remembered. The grizzled sergeant Masters become extremely enamored with 
of the city watch becomes a memorable the ally aspect of the game. Sometimes that 
character they may call on in the future rather leads to very large parties of player characters 
than just a momentary encounter they forget and their followers, which then demands 
by the next scene. Not every Extra needs this very large parties of opponents. 
kind of depth, of course, but those that do It’s okay if you do this — the system can 
add a level of realism, continuity, and most handle it — but be warned that a combat with 
importantly immersion to your game. 50 + combatants will take a bit, even with a 

fast and furious system like this one! 

| vo THE (ACKLEY CTRATH 
“NATE AND prt HATE (T WHEN 

LAuGH. | HAVE TO MAKE SUE 10 DO IT MoE OFTEN!” 
~The 6M 

SAVAGE WORLDS 



® DISTRACTED: The character suffers —2 to all Trait rolls until the end of his next turn. 

® VULNERABLE: Actions and attacks against the target are made at +2 until the end of 
his next turn. This doesn’t stack with The Drop (page 100) — use only the highest. 

® ENTANGLED: The victim can’t move and is Distracted. 

# BOUND: The victim may not move, is Distracted and Vulnerable, and cannot make 
physical actions other than trying to break free. 

FATIGUED 
® FATIGUED: The victim subtracts 1 from all Trait rolls. If he takes another level of 

; 

btracts 2 from all Trait rolls. If 

se specified by the source, Fatigug 

brs may not perform actions but 4 
ase they recover. 

5 may only move and take free ag 
lly make a Spirit roll to recove 

ers fall prone and can’t take an; 
page 100). At the start of each d 
ir roll as a free action to revive. § 
rable; a raise means he recovers 

en injured in a way that makes 
|. " 

cD Od IinimitimoO dnc 

Trait rolls (to a maximum o er’s limit Incapacitate her. 

[7] 
= 
2 
m 

2 
& 
o 
3] 

= 
4 

3



[72] 
[=] 
= 
[+4 
o 
S 
[=] 

& 
4 
wn 

LARGE 
BLAST 

TEMPLATE 

SMALL SMALL 
BLAST BLAST 

TEMPLATE TEMPLATE 



RR 

Snowe 
a | TENPLATE 
 * 

MEDILM 
BLAST 

TEMPLATE 

DONIH3ILSVIN JINYD 



[72] 
a — aa ~ 
= 
[4 Symbols Bonus Damage 94 Dogfights 119 

[®) 4WD. See Four-Wheel Drive Born A Hero 136 Dog/Wolf 181 
Bound 98, 101 

= A Double Barrel 105 

Acceleration 82 Breaking Things 98 Dragon 181 
[=] Aces 88 Breath Weapons 175 Drake 182 

& Action 91,92 Bulky Items 67 Dramatic Tasks 122,125,143 
Action Cards 90-91, 113, 122 Bull 180 The Drop 100 

= Action Deck 6 Bump 116 Drowning 126 
Bumps & Bruises 125 Dumb Luck 138 

wn Advancement 54 
Agility 10,29 Burrowing 175 Dwarves 14 
Aim 97 Cc Dynamic Backlash 138, 153 
Air Bags 82, 118 Caliber 65 E 
Aircraft 84 Called Shots 98, 106 Edges 11,37-53 
Allies 111. See also Extras Vehicles 117 Background 37 
Advancement 54 Campaign Types 196 

Combat 40 
Personalities 112 Canister 77 Legendary 53 

Alligator/Crocodile 180 Cannons 77 
AMCM. See Anti-Missile Catapults 77 Power 45 

Professional 47 
Counter Measures Cat, Small 181 

Ammo 68, 132 Cauterize 76 Requirements 37 

Ammo Level 112 Celestial 20-21 Social 50 

Amphibious 82 Change Position 115 Summaries 59 

Android 12 Character Creation Summary 55 Weird 51 

Anti-Missile Counter Measures 82 Characters, Replacement 54 Electricity 126 

Anti-Missile Systems 79 Charging 103 Elemental 176, 182, 183 

AP. See Armor Piercing Chase 113 Elf 14 

Aquarian 13 Actions 114 Encounters 144 
Aquatic 175 Cards 113-117, 120-121 Encumbered 67 
Arcane Backgrounds 147 Customization 119 Encumbrance 116,7 
Arcane Devices 148, 152-153 Rounds 114 Entangled 98, 101 
Creation 152 Climb 82 Environmental Resistance 176 
Multiple Powers 152 Climbing 125 Environmental Weakness 176 

Arcane Skill 147 Cold 125 Ethereal 176 
Area Effect Attacks 78, 80, 97 Collisions 118 Evade 115 
Armor 65,69, 175 Combat 91 Evasion 100 
Ancient 69 Command Range 44 Exhausted 100 
Futuristic 70 Companion 7 Experience 199 
Medieval 69 Complications 116,123 Experienced Characters 54 
Modern 70 Concept 9 Exploration 196 
Shields 71 Cone Template 97 Extras 87,92, 111, 202. See 

Armor Piercing 65, 151 Construct 176 also Allies 
Attacks 93, 117 Consumables 152 Aftermath 96 
Attendant 169 Conviction 136 Critical Failure 88 
Attributes 10,29 Countdown 92. See 
Availability 145 also Action Cards F 

Avion 13 Cover 97,99 Falling 103,127 

Awards 89 Bonus 99 Fanatics 138 
Fast Healing 139 

B Penalties 99 

Background 11 Creative Combat 137 Fatigue 100, 125 

Backlash 150 Crews 121 Recovery 100 

Dynamic 138 Critical Failure 88,113, 138 Fatigued 100 

Battle Effects 132 Crush 102 Fear 124,176 

Battle Modifiers 131 D Fearless 176 

Bear 180 Damage 66, 90,94, 117-118 Finishing Move 101 

Bennies 89,95, 138, 200 Damage Types 98 Fire 78, 127 

Awarding 90 Defend 100 Firing Into Melee 101. See 
Game Master 89 Derived Statistics 10 also Innocent Bystander 
Player Character 89 Deviation 97 Fixed Weapons 117 

Bite 175 Dice 6 Flamethrowers 78 
Blast Templates 97. See also Area Difficult Ground 92 Flaming Weapons 127 
Effect Attacks Dire Wolf 181 Flee 116 

Bleeding Out 95-96 Disarm 100 Flight 176 
Board 115 Disease 126 Force 116 
Boarders 114 Disruption 150 Four-Wheel Drive 82 
Bodyguard 169 Distance 91 Free Actions 92 
Bombard 77 Distracted 100 Free Attacks 101, 109 



G K Power Modifiers 151 
Game Master 6, 193 Knockout Blow 100 Power Points 90, 132, 147, 152 (7) 
Game Nights 194 L Powers > 
Ganging Up 101 Lich 185 Activation 150, 153 
Gargantuan 176 Lion 185 Maintaining 140, 150 =3 Naming 154  
Gear 11 Low Light Vision 177 
Ghost 183 Preparation 140 

M = 
Giant Worm 184 Starting 147 

Magic 148 
Gifted 148 Prone 93,104 & 

Malfunctions 153 Psionics 148 | 
GM. See Game Master Maneuvering Skills 113, 116 
Goblin 184 Push 104 = 

Maneuvers 115 
Golden Hour 96 Mass Battles 131 Q = 
Grappling 98, 101, 178 Mech 185 Quick Encounters 134 2 
Breaking Free 98 Melee Attacks 93 R 7] 

Grenades 78 Mines 79 Races 9,12 
Gritty Damage 139 Miniatures 7, 97 Making 18 
Ground Vehicles 83 Minimum Speed 114 Racial Abilities 18-20 
Group Roll 89 Minimum Strength 66 Negative 20 
Guardian 20-21 Minotaur 186 Positive 18 

H Miracles 148 Radiation 129 

Hack and Slash 196 Mirror Self 169 Raise 88 

Half-Elf 15 Missiles 79 Rakashan 16 

Half-Folk 15 Modern Firearms 74 Ram 116 

Handling 81 Lasers 76 Range 66,97 

Hard Choices 139 Machine Guns 75 Penalties 93 
Ranged Attacks 93 

Hardness 71, 73 Pistols 74 
Hardy 177 Rifles 75 Ranged Weapons in Melee 104 

Hazards 92,101,125 Shotguns 74 Range Increment 114,120 
Ranks 54 

HE. See High Explosive Submachine Guns 74 

Healing 96 Modifiers, Comprehensive 34 Raptor 187 
Rate of Fire 66, 93 

Heat 128 Morale 132 
Mounted Combat 103 Reach 66 

Heatstroke 128 
Movement 92, 104 Reaction Fire 82,117 

Heavy Armor 82 Reactions 33 
Heavy Flamethrowers 80 Mule 186 

Multi-Actions 103 Readying Weapons 105 
Heavy Weapon 66 

Powers 150 Recharging 150, 153 
Heroes Never Die 140 Multiple Languages 140 Recoil 75-76, 93,105 
High Adventure 140 Regeneration 177 
High Explosive 66 N 

Relative Speed Penalty 106 
Hindrances 9, 22-28 Natural Healing 96 

Reload 66 
Summaries 56-57 Natural Weapons 104 

Reloading 105 
Hold 102 Nausea 124 

Repairs 118 
Hold Steady 116 Negotiating 145 

Reroll 89 
Horror 197 Networking 133 

Resilient 178 
Horse 184 Night Vision 82 Rocket Launchers 80 

Nonlethal Damage 104 
Horse, War 185 RoF. See Rate of Fire 

No Power Points 140 
Hot Potato. See Grenades Roleplaying 197 
Hover 82 [+] Round 91 
Humans 16 Obstacles 98, 99. See also Cover Rule of Threes 128 
Hunger 128 Occupants 118 Running 92, 104, 105 
HW. See Heavy Weapon Off-Hand Attacks 104 Running the Game 198 

Ogre 186 
I S 

Opposed Rolls 88 
Nllumination 102 Safety Harnesses 82 

Orc 186 
Immunity 177 Saurian 17 

Chieftain 186 
Improvised Weapons 102 Savage Settings 6-7 

Out of Control 113,117-120 
Incapacitation 87, 95, 96, 100 Savage Tales 7 

Out of Control (Table) 119 
Infection 177 Scale 106 

Overcharge 76 
Infrared Night Vision 82 Sentinel 169 

P 
Infravision 177 Setting Rules 136 

Pace 10, 82 
Initiative. See Action Cards Setting Weapons 103 

Pacing 200 
Injury Table 95 Shaken 90, 94, 96, 102 

Paralysis 177 
Innocent Bystander 102, 178 Shark 187 

Parry 10, 66, 93 
Interludes 130 Great White 187 

Passengers 81 Shields 71 
Interrupting 102 Personal Weapons 72-73 Bash 71 
Invulnerability 177 Black Powder 73 Shorting 150, 152 
J Ranged 73 Shotguns 74, 105 
Jaded 124 Pintle Mount 82 Shrapnel 77 
Jokers 92 Player Character 87 Shuffle 92 
Joker's Wild 89 Plot Point Campaigns 7 Situational Rules 97 
Jumping 93 Poison 128, 177 Size 81,106, 178 



Skeleton 188 Support 96, 106, 123, 145 u 
Skill Points Suppressive Fire 107 Unarmed Defender 109 
More (Setting Rule) 140 Surprise 108 Unarmored Hero 141 

Skills 10, 29-36 Swarm 189 Undead 178 
Buying 10 Swat 178 Unstable Platform 109 
Core 10 Synergy 149 v 
Creating 32 

T Vampire 189 
Familiarization 36 

Tank Guns 80 Vampire, Ancient 190 
Philosophy 32 

Target Number 87 Vehicle Critical Hits (Table) 119 
Specialization 141 

Task Tokens 122 Vehicles 81, 83-85, 109 
Unskilled Attempts 89 

Sleep 129 Templates 97 Converting 82 
Tentacles 178 Critical Hits 117, 119 

Sloped Armor 82 
Terror 124 Movement 120 

Slugs 105 
Test 107, 108 Vehicular Weapons 80 

Smarts 10, 29 
Smoke Inhalation 128 Thirst 129 Vigor 10, 29 

Snake 188 Three-Round Burst 67 Vulnerable 100 

Snapfire 66 Time 91 w 

Soak Rolls 96 Tinkering 153 Wall Walker 178 

Social Conflict 143 TN. See Target Number Watercraft 85 

Soldier 112, 188 Top Speed 81 Weakness 178 

Solid Shot 77 Torpedoes 80 Wealth 145 

Spacecraft 82 Touch Attack 108 Weapon Mount 82 

Special Weapons 77 Toughness 11,81 Weird Science 148 

Speed 106 Tracked 82 Werewolf 191 

Spider, Giant 188 Trait 9,29-36 Wild Attack 109 

Spirit 10,29 Changes 30 Wild Card 87 

Stabilizer 82 Rolls 87 Wild Die 87-88, 103 

Starting Funds 65 Summaries 58 Withdrawing 109 

State Summaries 203 Trappings 149 Wound Cap 141 

Stealth Paint 82 Travel 144 Wound Penalties 95-96 

Strength 10,29 Troll 189 Wounds 87, 95 

Stun 178 Turn 91 Wrecked 118 

Stunned 102, 106 Turret 82 Zz 
Supers 147 Two Weapons 108 Zombie 191 



ANY, TIME; ANY/PLAGES | a - 
THE. SAVAGE. WORLDS JADVENTUREJEDITIONATAKES ou ANYWHERERYOU! 

~ WANTRTONGONFROMBTHENWEIRD AWILDRWESTHOEND SRTORTHE 
* GRIME; RIDDEN|STREETS OF NEGESSARY EVO EES OS 

AY OF EAST. TEXAS UNIVERSITY, TO}T HE (DISTANT, UNTAMEDAWORLDSIOFATHE 
[LAST PARSEG:* 
OR FORGE YOUR OWN, WORLDS,F ULLY GUSTOMIZED! WITHISETTINGZ SPECIFIC 
RULETSO  HELP.NT) MODELEVERYTHING] FROM PULP. ADVENTURE! 10] SWORD 

“AND SURGERY, 0) HARD SGIENGE FICTION AND EVERYTHING'IN/ BETWEEN 

2 AFTERAYERRS OF FINE- TUNING AND! PLAYTESTING WITH FELLOW GAMERS 
2“ AROUND THE |W ORLD, "THIS. VERSION, OF THE SAWARD;WINNING, 

SELLING{SAVAGEW ORLDS GAME COMBINES NEW ANDU PDATED RULES) 
ji BAN USE] {1T a GAMING A1 TLACTILCAL EFOUN DiATI ON 

|1S|MORE FAST, ERIS; & FUN 

nn 
Lu REVIEWS 

“The bestiof both worlds: a solid'base set of rules and a ton of games that use 
them.” —Dawn Dalton, Geek & Sundry 

“Well worth considering for'almostiany GM or gaming group looking for a system 
& which can fit both theiristyle of play and the setting of their choice.” ~EN World 

“I honestly don’t thinkitherefsianother system out there with versatility and.intui- 
tive simplicity of Savage Worlds =Kurt Schneider, Gnome Stew 

“(Savage Worlds)iis almost exactly atithelsweetispot between crunch and fast. You 
know there’s enough feel'tojit that you can'changelittaround for setting material. 

You can get a sense of mastery. You can tweak it, you can learn it;;you can expand 
it or not expand it. But it’s stillfatiitsibasisfasvery fast, very pure, very basic 
system.” —Kenneth Hite 

"BLNNACLE 
ENTESTAINMENT SRouE 

Ea RN